# Aids Task Force Report

PDF: https://www.pcahistory.org/pca/digest/studies/2-037.pdf
Extraction tool/version: PCA Historical Center indexed PDF text + local GA minutes slice (manual fuzzy reconciliation), 2026-07-14
OCR warnings: local container proxy blocked direct PDF download; text below is the matched local minutes/digest slice used as the auditable normalized extraction surrogate for this chunk.
Status: mapped
Match confidence: high

--- Page/range: 17th GA (1989), 17-25, pp. 62–77
Source: markdown/ga17_1989.md lines 3726-4495

PCA - AIDS TASK FORCE REPORT

When the church speaks prophetically to a current issue seeking to shine the light
of God's Word upon it, it can have two foci. The church can speak to its members
and/or it can speak to society at large. The AIDS crisis provides ample opportunity for
both. The task given to us by General Assembly clearly delineates the former as our
responsibility. We have been charged with the task of "bring(ing) recommendations to
the next General Assembly; which recommendations will serve to give direction and
provide educational guidelines for individuals and churches to use in dealing with the
AIDS epidemic and pandemic."

when a doctor is confronted by certain symptoms of a disease, he is obliged to
treat it in a two-fold manner. He will seek to provide medication to ease the immediate
suffering brought on by the symptoms. He will not stop there, however. He will also
seek to treat the underlying disorder that produced the symptoms, so that the symptoms
will disappear. Analogously, the church's response must be two-fold. Presented with
the AIDS epidemic, the church has certain immediate pastoral and diaconal
responsibilities, but our analysis must go much deeper. We must seek to put our finger
on the disorder in our society that has produced AIDS.

Hence, this report is structured in this two-fold approach. The first part will deal
with the opportunity the AIDS crisis presents the church with to deal pastorally and
diaconally, immediately. The second part seeks to uncover some of the underlying
disorders to which the church must address itself over the long term.

part i

Our increased likelihood of involvement with those PWAs (Persons with AIDS) is
not hypothetical. Individuals and families within congregations of the PCA are already
dealing with AIDS. Congregations both in larger metropolitan areas and in smaller
communities throughout our continent are now facing the dilemmas of dealing with
persons within the local church who have tested HIV positive. As the numbers of those
in our churches and our communities affected by AIDS increase, it will be necessary
for local congregations to have a well-thought-out plan of action in response.

As individuals come in faith and repentance to Jesus Christ and are incorporated
into the life of the local church, we must realize the probability that some people have
come out of various backgrounds we now speak of as "high risk" backgrounds include
those individuals who are homosexual, bi-sexual, or IV drug users. Those persons,
after conversion, may, at a later date, become HIV positive; possibly go onto develop
ARC (AIDS Related Complex) and to develop full blown AIDS. In addition to these,
there are others, within our congregations, who may develop AIDS through more
indirect means (i.e. blood transfusion, intra-uteral infection, pre-marital sex, and
adultery). when we include the family and loved ones of the PWAs, the need for
ministry becomes more acute. As ADDS increases it is, by ripple effect, beginning to
touch the lives of families and friends we know whoa remembers of our congregations.

<a id="ga17-p63"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=17 pdf_page=65 printed_page=63 -->

Now is the time, therefore, for local PCA churches and their leadership to begin
thinking through how they will respond to the needs of all concerned when faced with
their first case of AIDS. For many of us, just having to think through the AIDS issue
and the ministry involved is a new experience. Most of us have faced this issue only at
a distance. Real interaction with the issue and the people involved had been minimal.
Statistics, projections, and, now, experience tells us that this will change. In light of
this and because AIDS is a highly emotional issue, due in part to the social, moral, and
medical stigma attached, it is expedient for church leaders to begin developing a
philosophy of ministry to all concerned before actually being faced with the task of
ministry

The pastoral implications of ministry to PWAs and their families are many. There
is a great opportunity and responsibility for the church to minister the love of Christ in
word and deed, not only to individuals and families within our congregations who are
being touched in some way by AIDS; but to those unbelievers suffering physical,
emotional, psychological, financial, and spiritual devastation. As one Reformed pastor
recently said, "At last we would see the church really being the church if we are willing
to respond to the AIDS crisis." That response, on the part of the church, involves the
tasks of tending the sick and of reconciling the repentant through word and deed. This
involves direct ministry to the suffering and dying.

One of the greatest challenges and opportunities of the church today is effective
ministry to PWAs and their families. Although the needs of the PWAs are many,
meeting a majority of these needs is entirely within the scope of the local church. The
church, in fact, is the most effective vehicle for helping the PWA and is the only source
that can minister to the whole person. Sources within the local church can go far in
meeting many of these needs.

As AIDS continues to impact our society and PWAs begin to surface in our local
churches, we have a biblical responsibility to care for our own who are HIV positive
and also those outside the church (Gal. 6:10 "Therefore, as we have opportunity, let us
do good to all people, especially to those who belong to the family of believers.") To
accomplish this, a crucial prerequisite is the AIDS education (medical and theological)
of our presbyteries. Then we must educate our local sessions and congregations.

Because of the fear connected with AIDS, the pastor and session must take the
initiative in education and leading the people in this area. Not to prepare one's
leadership and congregation paves the way for a purely emotional response, based on
misinformation and fear when a case of AIDS is revealed in our churches. Such a
response is void of the pastoral calling of church leadership to minister to both the
PWA and the congregation as a whole. Planning and preparation of our churches to
deal with the AIDS issues biblically prevents overreactions which may hinder ministry
to PWAs and will forestall congregational difficulties.

In addition to ministering to our own churches, we have a biblical responsibility to
follow our Lord's example and reach out beyond our church doors to the suffering
world. Those involved with church growth have been telling us for years that people
become much more receptive to the gospel as their world views are shaken,
psychologically, medically, financially, and politically. AIDS is definitely shaking
world views and tearing away the false foundation of those dealing with it. We,

<a id="ga17-p64"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=17 pdf_page=66 printed_page=64 -->

therefore, believe that there exists a great evangelistic opportunity in the midst of the
age of AIDS, an opportunity that cannot be missed.

Our churches must bring the gospel to bear on the questions PWAs are beginning
to ask; questions of an eternal nature, questions being asked for the first time by those
at the crux of a life threatening disease. It is the Christian church, after all, which is the
only resource capable of answering these questions concerning matters of the heart.
The world cannot answer them, and we cannot allow secular society to attempt
Kingdom work.

There is much "pastoral care" being provided by secular society which has little to
do with the specific spiritual needs of the individual dealing with AIDS. In many
circles today, one can hear the familiar refrain, "We don't talk about dying around here,
we talk about living." Such a superficial response by "care givers" in the midst of a
disease most experts are saying is 100% fatal, is severely flawed. In these cases, failure
to discuss, in the appropriate context, a person's relationship to God and eternity misses
the point.

The church's pastoral ministry in the AIDS issue is two-fold. First, we must care
for our own congregations both by ministry to those who have AIDS and educating the
rest medically and biblically about the issues surrounding AIDS. Secondly, we must
minister to those outside Christ who have AIDS and who need healing from the
spiritual blindness in which they are living. We must strive to see that all who are
dealing with AIDS experience comfort and healing in their mortal bodies in the midst
of suffering.

AIDS may very well be one of the most "gut-wrenching" issues that we, as a
church, face for the remainder of the twentieth century. We must never forget,
however, that behind the issues, behind the media demagogy, and behind the massive
literature, are real people-people to whom only the church of jesus christ can minister
in a truly biblical sense.

Part II

The church's responsibility cannot end by dealing only diaconally and pastorally
with AIDS sufferers. This would be to treat only the symptom. The church must seek
by the light of God's word to understand what is at the root of the aids epidemic, to
expose the disease that has produced AIDS.

The question has been asked, "Is AIDS a judgment of God on the homosexual?"*
We must recognize that AIDS cannot be laid at the feet of the homosexual only, but
that AIDS is God's judgment on a society. aids is a symptom of a diseased and
godless society that has rejected God's Word. therefore the question of culpability
must be brought home to each person. For it is to the degree that we have not fulfilled
our callings in obedience to God’s Word that we have contributed to the situation in our
culture that has produced the AIDS epidemic.

* accompanying this paper a san appendix is a theological treatment of the question, "Is AIDS a
judgment of god on the homosexual?" (See page 70.)

<a id="ga17-p65"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=17 pdf_page=67 printed_page=65 -->

This message needs to be proclaimed to the unbelieving world to call them to
repentance and faith in Jesus Christ. However, in keeping with our mandate as a
committee the following analysis is directed first of all to the church. To the degree
that we, in our callings, have failed, we need to repent and bring forth fruit in keeping
with our repentance.

the following is a hr ie f sketch of a society that has turned from God's norms for
life. It cannot be detailed. It is our hope that the contours of the problem will become
evident and that thereby it will help to point to more specific areas of disobedience that
need to be dealt with. Further, it is our hope that God’s people will be called again to
bring God’s Word to bear on every area of life, so that in all our lives God might be
glorified and in so doing we might be an irresistible light in a dark world.

marriage is to be a lifelong and total union between a man and a woman that is to
be governed by love and faithfulness. Sex is a gift given by God in creation to be
enjoyed in the context of this relationship alone.

It has been the departure from this norm that has been the occasion of the AIDS
epidemic. The institution of marriage is breaking down at an alarming rate. As the
creational context for sex crumbles numerous sexual disorders and deviations have
flooded in to fill the void that has been created. In our culture sex has become an idol
as it has been wrenched from its God-given context.

We call upon Christians, insofar as they have departed from God’s norms for
marriage and sex, to repent and commit themselves to a renewed obedience. One of the
most powerful weapons that the Christian has is the opportunity to be a bright, beaming
light that attracts others to the blessing of a godly marriage.

Children will generally be the product of and the blessing of God on the sexual
union in marriage. Thus a family is formed. God gives clear light in His Word on the
responsibility and task of parents and children. Parents are responsible to nurture their
children in the Lord by the divinely appointed means of example, instruction and
discipline. Children in turn are to honour and obey their parents submitting to the
forming and nurture given by the parents.

In our culture, parents and children have failed. Parents have failed to model the
Biblical institution of marriage wherein healthy, meaningful, fulfilling and Godhonouring sex can be found. Parents have failed to instruct their children with respect
to God’s norms for sex. Finally, permissiveness permeates parenting today and God’s
command for correction is not heeded. Children have conformed to the spirit of our age
that rejects and has no respect for authority.

God calls His people to godly and Biblical family relationships. Parents must take
hold of their role ordained by God and by example, instruction and discipline teach
their children to be covenant keepers in not only their sexuality but in all their flesh and
blood existence before the face of God. Children must be called to submit to their
parents' loving nurture and learn to obey the Lord.

A godly family must bear eloquent and radiant testimony to God's good order for
the family calling unbelievers by this mute witness to repentance. One can only guess

<a id="ga17-p66"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=17 pdf_page=68 printed_page=66 -->

how much the breakdown of marriage and family has contributed to the AIDS epidemic
ravaging our nations.

The educational community must also bear the burden of blame for our AIDS
epidemic. There is in our nation a monopoly of humanistic (public) education. The
secular world view that underlies the education of our children has gone far to entrench
a relativistic ethic in North America. God has been banished from the natural sciences
by the concept of "natural law" and banished from the social sciences and humanities
by the idea of "values".

Unfortunately, Christian schools that have sprung up in response to this monopoly
have often adopted the secular and atomistic approaches to education. A Christian
icing has thinly covered an otherwise humanistic cake.

Christians have acquiesced to this state of affairs allowing schools to be the
primary agent of humanisn/secularism that has engulfed our countries. We must call
for diverse educational choices so our children may be taught to keep covenant with
God in all of life. If we are to fight a spiritual battle, our "warriors-in-training" must be
properly equipped to fight not declawed by the enemy.

Some blame must be laid at the feet of the media for a couple of reasons. First, by
a pursuit of the almighty dollar wherein the profit motive has become the norm, the
various media have been concerned with consumption rather than communication.
While God's Word calls the media to communicate honestly and respectfully on
significant issues, these norms have been violated in attempt to attract another
consumer.

Secondly, the media's world view has been exclusively dominated by one world
view (liberal humanism) and the product has resembled, not diverse opinions geared to
express the diverse world views of its citizenry, but propaganda.

This has combined to have a devastating effect on our culture. Gradually the
views of the citizens are being brought into line with the humanistic views of the
powerful media. Without question this situation has contributed to the homosexual
problem with its AIDS infection.

To the degree that Christians have masqueraded in the cheap costume of the world
and adopted its approach to the media, either in its consumption or practice, we must
repent and renew our commitment of glorifying God in this vitally important area of
our lives.

When the institutional church points its finger at the homosexual, three fingers are
pointing right back at her.

We, too often, have misunderstood the role of the institutional church in God's
kingdom. it is to be a worship center, a recruitment station and training ground to equip
God's people for kingdom service in every sector of their lives. We have, however,
turned the church into a resort where weary soldiers withdraw from the battle rather
than being trained to battle.

<a id="ga17-p67"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=17 pdf_page=69 printed_page=67 -->

Further, we have not been faithful to declare the whole counsel of God. Ministers
have too often worn the dualistic glasses of a sacred/secular division which has
rendered the Word of God irrelevant, if not inoperative in the majority of life.

Thirdly, the church has unlovingly stigmatized homosexuals. A loving
atmosphere that encourages communication that may lead to repentance is absent and is
replaced all too often by a harsh, critical and judgmental self-righteousness.

Finally, the church has failed to be a vital community of prayer. Paul calls on the
church to pray for all men (I Tim. 2: Iff.), but prayer has become too often a perfunctory
and insipid exercise. And when it does exist vitally, it has all too often turned inward
and selfish in its focus.

In all these areas the church needs to repent and again take up her task in God's
kingdom. The church must again see itself as a training ground for spiritual soldiers.
She must proclaim God's Word in all its vital and life-giving relevance and power for
all of life. She must break down the barriers that hinder the homosexual from seeing
the church as a place of help. Finally, the church must be restored to a vital, communal
prayer life that takes God's whole creation within its parameter.

The medical profession has failed in its responsibility by adopting a solely
materialistic view of its task. The profession has become a handy tool of humanists
who seek to defy God in their lifestyle while remaining protected in their bodies from
the consequences of that lifestyle.

To the extent that a proper response to the AIDS epidemic and those infected with
the AIDS virus requires medical knowledge, the medical profession should recognize
its calling in containing the disease, pursuing a cure and treating those who are ill with
AIDS.

god has bound us together in political communities made up of citizens in all their
social and cultural life and governing, political authorities to maintain justice in that
terrain. Both the political authorities and citizens have failed in their calling and thus
contributed to the AIDS virus.

Politicians have, too often, been sounding boards for public opinion, rather than
principled men who minister justice. Further, in our countries we have a history of civil
rights that is based on individualism rather than God's calling. Both of these failures of
governing authorities havel edt oa breakdown in our culture of a publicly just
community. AIDS is one of the bad fruits of that development.

Too many citizens have acquiesced in this state of affairs. Either this has come
from a lack of critical awareness of our political development ora lack of concern to
see government function in the way God has called them to. On the other hand, other
citizens have put too much confidence in the governmental authorities to solve the
problems of our nations. The attitude of citizens to governmental authority has been
the same as that attitude C. S. Lewis once pointed out that most Christians had toward
demons. Either one ignored them or was fascinated by them.

<a id="ga17-p68"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=17 pdf_page=70 printed_page=68 -->

Unfortunately, Christian citizens have fallen in these same categories as the
abortion problem has made plain. Christian politician and citizens must be called by
God to reflect together on what governmental authority is as granted by God.
Politicians must again be called to be ministers of justice. And in our situation now,
with the threats brought by ADDS, government must be called to fulfill its responsibility
to curb the AIDS epidemic through the formulating, enforcing and adjudicating of just
laws.

In this regard, we would be remiss if we did not make reference to the issue of safe
sex. since this is so highly publicized and is the effort of a christian politician of high
standing within our own ranks, it cannot be avoided. There is, however, disagreement
in the committee on the nature of the political community, the role of political authority
and the nature of civil law and its relationship to God's law. These disagreements have
resulted in different analyses of the safe sex issue.

On one side, two committee members see the political authority as an integrator of
public justice. That is, the state is responsible to protect the freedoms and space needed
by individuals and institutions in society to fulfill their calling before God. They must
in a just way protect those rights of all citizens and communities within its domain.
The state is not a new national church wherein its authorities after the manner of church
government are to punish every breach of God's law. Rather, the state is responsible to
protect, by legal codification and rights and freedoms of all citizens and communities
domiciled within their domain.

In this view, a public health officer is responsible for the public health of the
community. Therefore, for him to fulfill his responsibility as an officer of God's just
and merciful rule, he must seek ways to protect the public health. As Moses, the
political authority permitted divorce because of the hardness of the hearts of the people
for the purpose of containing devastating social consequences, so the public health
officer is responsible to contain the devastating health consequences of man's sin. This
may in principle involve the pushing of safe sex measures.

However, on the other hand the two other members of the committee could not see
condoning in principle any notion of safe sex. The following two paragraphs express
the rationale that Christians should not advocate safe sex outside of marriage.

One of the duties required in the seventh commandment is the preservation of
chastity in the body, mind, and behavior of others. Also, the ninth commandment
forbids holding our peace when iniquity calls for a reproof from ourselves, or a
complaint to others. It is, therefore, sin to facilitate anyone in carrying out a
contemplated sin. Christians should not sin by teaching technologies intended to secure
someone ffom the consequences of contemplated sin. Rather, as we have opportunity,
we are to admonish those tempted to sin and ourselves recall that God is not mocked by
those who sow evil. There is no truly "safe sex" other than that of chaste individuals
who marry and remain mutually faithful.

Christians accepting the office of a magistrate should be careful not to usurp the
educational authority deposited by God with parents and the church. Rather,
magistrates should recall their obligation in the office to maintain piety according to
wholesome laws.

<a id="ga17-p69"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=17 pdf_page=71 printed_page=69 -->

This report has been a sketch of our society, not a detailed analysis. Its purpose is
to alert the Christian community to the fact that God calls men to obedience in every
area and sector of life. Failing in our calling, whether it be as husbands or wives,
parents or children, citizens or politicians, teachers or students, doctors or patients,
business people or consumers, elders or church members, journalists or professionals,
all disobedience brings God's judgment not just on us individually, but often on others
we live in community with. Our sin has communal dimensions.

Christians must be challenged again to work out what it means to glorify God in
all dimensions of life, to develop a world view which enables us to bring all of life
under the authority and lordship of Jesus Christ. We must repent when we have been
conformed to an ungodly view of life. The church must be called to be light and not
hide it under the bushel of a secular world view and lifestyle. The gospel must again
break through in power to transform our individual and communal lives.

We praise God that He has sent the Lord Jesus Christ to make this a reality. We
praise God that in spite of our disobedience He is still sovereign, He holds His world in
love, He is building His eternal kingdom and that He will triumph. With this hope, by
faith we commit ourselves again to a renewed obedience to be fellow-workers with God
in His kingdom.

FOOTNOTE

A good example of this can be seen in the whole issue of sex education in the
public school. When a state is going to provide one common school system all values
must systematically extirpate. If the truth of God's creation is removed then another all
encompassing commonality must be found to integrate education.

This commonality is the common human rationality. Rationality is erected to the
place of an idol and education serves this god rather than the Lord God. Basic
convictions and beliefs not held in common must be eliminated from the learning
process in public schools

In the area of sex education this commitment becomes evident. Since there are
different views on the nature of marriage and ethics of sex the school must leave that
question "open." There can be no discrimination or values. But they must teach
something. sex education becomes a lesson in the mechanics and techniques of sex.

The only foundation for fulfilling and meaningful sex cannot be taught.
Techniques and mechanics are taught under the pretense of scientific, rational
neutrality. Children are supposedly taught facts apart from values.

Under this guise of scientific neutrality, the City of New York sexual education
program teaches students to "identify and evaluate the choices involved in sexual
expression.” The choices range: abstinence, sexual fantasy, masturbation, hugging,
kissing, petting, exploration, intercourse, nocturnal emission, homosexual preference,
homosexual experience, gay, lesbian, bisexual, transvestite, transsexual!

<a id="ga17-p70"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=17 pdf_page=72 printed_page=70 -->

This range is being taught to students in the largest city in the USA. This is not a
neutral presentation of facts apart from values. This proclaims loud and clear a
humanistic world view. Man is the measure of all things. Man chooses what "good
sex" is.

APPENDIX: AIDS AS GOD'S JUDGMENT?

Can we speak of AIDS as God's judgement on the homosexual? This will be
discussed under five points.

First, all sickness and calamity that comes in history is God's judgment on sin.
Therefore, in a general way, we can immediately say that yes AIDS is God's judgment
on sin. In the beginning in Eden there was no sickness, no sorrow, no pain. When
Adam and Eve rebelled against God, God pronounced judgment on them. Their lives
would be lives of suffering. They would be filled with struggle and grief, sorrow and
pain, sickness and affliction. This was God's righteous judgment on sinful man.

We must be very careful here not to smuggle into our thought an incipient deism.
One often hears the distinction made between God's judgment on sin and a consequence
for sin. When the language of consequence is used we must be careful. There may be a
helpful way of making that distinction (see under the third point of this appendix) but
one must be careful that it is not a distinction with roots in the soil of deism.

We must not view calamity as a mechanical recoiling of creation on an offender.
If one lifts a mousetrap and sticks his hand under it, and lets go, it snaps down on his
hand causing pain. However, there was no intention involved. The mousetrap is not a
conscious and free agent that makes a conscious choice to cause me pain. That is just
the way the mousetrap is constructed to operate. Pull the spring back, let it go and it
will by nature of its construction snap down.

We cannot view God's judgment in that kind of a way. One hears that heavy
drinking brings the consequence of liver trouble or drunken driving tragedies. Or chain
smoking brings the consequence of lung cancer and so forth.

But this is taking a deistic view of things. Deism advocates a God who created the
world like a watch. He created it with all its parts and left it to run independently of
any further personal involvement, or at least minimal personal involvement. After all
the watch might need to be fixed or even improved. In any case, it runs unattended
according to ironclad impersonal laws established in the construction of the created
order on the energy it was originally equipped with. So if one violates the laws of
creation, there is an impersonal backlash or recoiling on the offender.

But the Bible gives a very different picture. "The Bible shows us a personalistic
world, not impersonal law. What we call scientific law is an approximate human
decision of just how faithfully and consistently God acts in ruling the world by
speaking. There is no mathematical, physical or theoretical 'cosmic machinery' behind
what we see and know, holding everything in place. Rather God rules and rules
consistently." (Vem Poythress, Symphonic Theology: the validity of multiple
Perspectives in Theology)

<a id="ga17-p71"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=17 pdf_page=73 printed_page=71 -->

God rules personally every aspect of creation according to His eternal plan. The
idea of natural law as an impersonal law separated from God's active and intimate
involvement is deistic. Rather, the fact that we can speak of laws in the first place is
that God rules the creation by His Word so consistently and regularly. God is faithful
as He personally rules the creation by His word. Nature is not an autonomous
substance with certain laws independent of God's personal ruling word. No! The world
acts in perfect accordance with the way God has in all eternity decreed it would and the
way God in time providentially and personally sustains and rules it.

He covers the sky with clouds; He supplies the earth with rain and makes the grass
grow on the hills. He provides food for the cattle and for the young ravens when
they call.... He sends His command to the earth; His word runs swiftly. He
spreads the snow like wool and scatters the frost like ashes, he hurls down his hail
like pebbles. Who can withstand his icy blast? He sends His word and melts
them; He stirs up His breezes and the waters flow (Psalm 147:8,9,15-18).

we live ina scientist ic society. The idea of natural law has so permeated our
culture, we are more prone to see the weatherman's explanation of the snow, frost, hail
and thaw than that of God’s! Our biology classes never even thought to say that God
causes the grass to grow and that it is God that supplies the earth with rain and the
animals with food.

All creation obeys the command of the sovereign Lord all the time. Whatever
happens in creation, happens because God has spoken and creation has obeyed that
Word. "Your laws endure to this day, for all things serve you" (Psalm 119:91).

The Bible tells us also that God "creates calamity."

I form the light and create darkness. I bring prosperity and create disaster; I the
Lord do all these things (Isaiah 45:7)
Who can speak and have it happen if the Lord has not decreed it? Is it not from
the mouth of the Most High that both calamities and good things come?
(Lamentations 3:37, 38)

Therefore, when AIDS hits our culture, this is not an impersonal consequence or a
backlash of nature against the offenders. This calamity is the personal and direct act of
God. He has sent the plague. It is His messenger. The AIDS virus obeys His
sovereign word. All calamity comes as God’s righteous judgment on sin.

The law given to Israel by God shows to us that God blesses obedience and curses
disobedience. When blessing comes to obedience or curses fall on disobedience we
must not think in terms of a "natural" or "mechanistic" consequence. It is God's hands
giving blessing or punishing with a curse.

Secondly, God deals with man in solidarity.

We have been nurtured in a society that accepts individualism as easily as it
accepts the air we breathe. Individualism that has permeated and gripped western
culture must be critiqued in light of God's Word.

<a id="ga17-p72"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=17 pdf_page=74 printed_page=72 -->

Individualism abstracts the individual from his creational context and calling. The
individual is prior to and more ultimate than any social grouping of which he is a part.
Marriage is a contract between two individuals to meet one another’s needs. The family
is a loosely or closely associated group of individuals. The school is a group of
individuals associated to learn. And one could continue. The point is that
individualism sees the individual person as prior. The institutions are not God's
creation with a created integrity of their own. They are merely collections of
individuals gathered to meet certain individual needs.

It is like saying the individual is the building brick of society. The bricks have
independent and prior existence. The house is then made by cementing these bricks
together. However, the house has no integrity of its own. it is just a collection of
bricks formed for a certain purpose. Individuals are like bricks having an independent
and prior existence. The societal institutions are collections of those individuals.

However, God does not view individuals as abstracted and isolated from their
callings. Each person is seen in the created context of their callings, i.e. as a husband,
as a father, as an elder, as a citizen, etc. Further these institutions have a created
integrity of their own.

When we pose the question, "Is ADDS God's judgment on the homosexual?" we
have already put the question into an individualistic context. We have separated the
homosexual form his society into which he is woven in his existence. We are isolating
the homosexual and asking if God is punishing him alone.

In Scripture God deals with people in their social contexts. Achan disobeyed God
and took some of the consecrated things from Israel’s victory over Jericho. God's
judgment falls on all of Israel. They are defeated at Ai. When Achan's sin is
discovered, his entire family is stoned. There is an organic solidarity of men that
constitutes God's creation. (We recognize this in our reformed doctrines of infant
baptism and the federal headship of Adam and Christ!)

Throughout the Old Testament we see that God punishes the whole nation of
Israel. The covenant community as a whole suffers the disobedience of the nation.
Amos 4:6-11 is a clear statement of this. God brings numerous calamities and tragedies
upon the whole nation of Israel. Throughout, Amos refers to the collective covenant
community as 'you.' The ungodly and small children also suffer God's judgment on a
morally decadent culture.

Romans 1:18-31 says the same thing. God's wrath falls on the Roman culture as
they have suppressed the truth of God and exchanged it for a lie.

God deals with families and nations in his judgment as well as individuals. This is
because he has bound them together in communal solidarity. The community has
created status and integrity before God and therefore God deals in blessing and
judgment with the community. Everyone suffers to some degree.

Third, those in society are responsible in varying degrees.

<a id="ga17-p73"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=17 pdf_page=75 printed_page=73 -->

it is not a matter of guilty or innocent. It is not as if some in society are guilty and
some are innocent. Society is far too cohesive and interdependent for that. When the
societal thread unravels in sinful failure, an idol replaces God as the centre of that
culture.

In the AIDS epidemic, many have failed. In the body of the report the main thesis
was that it is the combination of failure in many callings that have contributed to the
AIDS epidemic.

Rather than speak of innocent or guilty, it would seem more appropriate to speak
of a spectrum. At one end of the spectrum, a direct link can be clearly discerned
between disobedience and God's judgment. At the other end of the spectrum, no
discemable link is evident. (Perhaps this is the way that consequence is often used —to
describe a situation where a disc e mable link between man's sin and God's judgment is
evident).

For example, when God rebukes all Israel and promises judgment on the whole
nation, often the covenant mediators such as kings, leaders, judges, prophets and priests
are blamed. Micah 3:8-12 is one such example. These office bearers are more
blameworthy because if they had fulfilled their calling, disobedience in the covenant
community would not be so rampant. God's judgment falls on all of Israel but the
leaders bear more responsibility. They have made a "bigger contribution" to the
problem. There is therefore more of a direct link between them and God's judgment
than the newborn bom in the poor family.

This principle has to be applied with care, discretion and wisdom to the AIDS
epidemic. It is God's judgment on our nations. We have noted some clearly discernible
ties between a failure in calling and God's judgment in the body of the report. This
must also be applied to the homosexual.

Each person has a sexual calling before God. that my be celibacy or marriage.
god has created the world in such away that a troth ful marriage relationship between
one man and one woman is the only context for sexual relations. Disobedience to this
norm brings God's judgment.

The homosexual has departed from this Scriptural norm. His homosexual activity
has contributed in very discernible ways to the AIDS epidemic. The regular ingestion
of semen and urine, the multiplicity of partners, the fragile tissue of the rectal lining
which bleeds, easily allowing viruses into the bloodstream all clearly manifest a direct
link between AIDS and homosexual practice. AIDS is God's judgment. Therefore, a
more direct link can be established between the homosexual and God's judgment.

Fourth, Scripture urges caution in drawing direct links between God’s judgment
and individual personal sin.

We will deal with three Biblical passages briefly. In the book of Job calamity
strikes Job. The mistake of Eliphaz, Bildad and Zophar was that they sought to link the
calamity Job was experiencing in a direct way to sin Job had committed. They sought a
direct link between God's judgment and Job's sinful action that was just not there. The
name "Job's comforter" as a derogatory term for one who aggravates one's misery while

<a id="ga17-p74"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=17 pdf_page=76 printed_page=74 -->

seeking to comfort is a warning to all who want to facile ly draw a direct connection
between God's judgment and man's actions.

John 9 is another helpful passage here. Jesus' disciples had been well trained in
the current religious thinking of that time, that simplistically drew a direct link between
God's judgment and man’s sinful activity. They ask Jesus in verse 2, "Rabbi, who
sinned, this man or his parents, that he was bom blind?" The very question evidences
the only way the disciples could think. For there to be a tragedy of this proportion,
someone must have sinned to bring down God's wrath. The only question was who was
individually responsible, the parents or the man himself?

Jesus' answer should caution any who are quick to judge. "Neither this man nor
his parents sinned" said Jesus, "but this happened so that the work of God might be
displayed in his life" (v.3).

Perhaps Luke 13 is the most lucid example of all. Jesus had urged a crowd of
many thousands of the necessity of timely repentance. In Luke 12:54-59, He chastises
the people for being able to read signs of weather but not the signs of God's judgment.
If they had they would seek to be reconciled to God through repentance as an offender
to an adversary who had a strong case against him and was taking him to court.

Some in the crowd, zealously no doubt sought to show that they could read the
signs of God's judgment. So they relate to Jesus the story where Pilate had attacked and
killed certain Jews while they were sacrificing in the temple, thus as it were, mixing
their blood with the sacrifices. Again the widely accepted notion that calamities were
God's judgment on exceedingly wicked people was back of this report. A direct link
between God's judgment and individual persons was drawn. They probably expected
Jesus to praise them for their insight into these signs of God's judgment.

But they were to be disappointed. Jesus rejects this notion. Jesus does not say
those Jews were not guilty. He only warns against the facile idea that the worst sinners
suffer. He says, "Do you think that these Galileans were worse sinners than all the
other Galileans because they suffered this way? I tell you no!"

Rather this disaster was a demonstration of God's wrath against a people, against
the Galileans. One group was not more guilty than another. it was to be a warning to
all men to repent or suffer God’s judgment. Then Jesus brings up another example of a
calamity. Eighteen people had died when the tower of Siloam fell on them. Were these
eighteen people more guilty than all the other residents of Jerusalem? Again, Jesus
says, "I tell you, no! But unless you repent, you too will perish." (v.5)

The parable of the fruitless fig tree that is annexed shows that God deals with a
people. The fig tree is not each individual person that does not bear fruit but the nation
of Israel. If they reject Christ, they would be cut down. The kingdom of God would be
taken from them and given to a people who would produce this fruit (Matthew 21:43).

These passages make it abundantly clear that we must be careful in drawing a
direct link between a calamity and a specific sinful and culpable act. As Herman
Bavinck has put it, "We cannot point out in particular the relationship between the sins
of men and the calamities of life. We are therefore not to infer from the fact that

<a id="ga17-p75"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=17 pdf_page=77 printed_page=75 -->

afflictions and calamities accrue to someone that his personal guilt had brought them
on. The friends of Job argued so and were mistaken" (Herman Bavinck Our
Reasonable Faith, p. 257).

Fifth, Scripture draws a link between God's judgment and homosexual behaviour.
The foregoing passages warn us of facilely and automatically drawing a direct link
between personal culpability and disaster. One ought to be hesitant to draw such a link
—and very careful.

In this case Scripture leads the way in describing a link between homosexuality
and God's judgment. The passage, of course, is Romans 1:26,27. "Because of this,
God gave them over to shameful lusts. Even their women exchanged natural relations
for unnatural ones. In the same way the men also abandoned natural relations with
women and were inflamed with lust for one another. Men committed indecent acts
with other men, and received in themselves the due penalty for their perversion."!

Note that because of the indecent acts (note that homosexuality is indecent acts not
a condition) with other men, they "receive in themselves the due penalty of their
perversion." The penalty has been interpreted by some to be the degrading homosexual
behaviour itself. This is a plausible exegesis and does not necessarily conflict with
what follows. However, the language could very well lead us to another fact. The
penalty could point to something other than the homosexual behaviour that God brings
in judgment. The two subordinate clauses which follow the (____ ) seem to show the
result of homosexual activity not the activity itself. If this is the case, there was some
other penalty that they received in themselves. Knowing the highly dangerousness and
susceptibility of homosexual activity, and the prevalence of venereal diseases in the
Roman empire, this may very well refer to those venereal diseases brought on by
homosexual activity. This exegesis is plausible and well within both the linguistic and
cultural range of the text. In any case, judgment of God (penalty) is linked directly to
homosexual behaviour in a context that begins, "The wrath of God is revealed...".

This indictment of the homosexual is not self righteous slur. The homosexual is a
victim of a corrupt society a swell as a responsible participant. The homosexual, like
all other members of society, must be called to repentance where he has failed in his
calling before God. God's judgment on aids on a disobedient culture is a warning to
the homosexual that God's judgment will fall on him on the final day if he does not
repent.

For further reference materials and a bibliography please refer to the preliminary
report of the AIDS Task Force of the 16th General Assembly, 1988 (pages 465-505).

The AIDS Task Force makes the following recommendations:

1. That priority be given in educating our churches and biblically about AIDS
beginning on the presbytery level and then the local sessions and congregations.
Adopted as amended

<a id="ga17-p76"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=17 pdf_page=78 printed_page=76 -->

2. That MTW and MNA incorporate AIDS education into the orientation and training
of those missionaries currently on the field, those in process of being sent, and
those involved in church planning. Adopted

3. that each local PCA church consider the advisability of drawing up and adopting
a general AIDS policy for its congregation outlining what ministry people with
AIDS may expect from the church, any restrictions to which they must submit, and
how the church will view people with AIDS.
Adopted as amended

4. That the PCA carry on a ministry of prayer for people with AIDS, petitioning the
Lord for a cure, for revival, and for repentance among those whose lifestyles help
propagate the spread of AIDS. Adopted

5. That local PCA churches provide positive biblical avenues of gospel ministry to
reach those both within and outside the church who are struggling with life
dominating sins. Adopted

6. That the Committee on Christian Education develop and implement, through Great
Commission Publications, a curriculum which has a biblical, Christian world-and-
life-view with specific application to contemporary issues for local churches to use
beginning on junior high level and upward. Adopted

7. That this ad interim study committee be dismissed with thanks.
Adopted as amended

Respectfully submitted,

RE Dr. Hilton Terrell
TE John Freeman
TE Michael Goheen
TE Earl Fair, Chairman

TE John Freeman of Harvest Ministries, a member of the Committee, also spoke briefly
