Source PDF: https://www.pcahistory.org/pca/digest/studies/2-093.pdf
Extraction note: PCA Historical Center PDF text matched and reconstructed from local GA minutes slices for audit.

--- 15th GA (1987), Appendix P minority report portion, pp. 423–430: ga15_1987 lines 23376-23730 ---

Carl W. Bogue, Jr.
George W. Knight, III, Chairman
Paul G. Settle

Appendices to the Report on the Validity of Certain Baptisms

1. The Action of the General Assembly, Old School, of 1845, (Minutes, 1845, pages 34-37).
the committee appointed to draw up a minute expressive of the views of the Assembly, presented a
report, which was read and adopted, and is as follows, viz.
"The Committee appointed to prepare a minute expressive of the view of this Assembly, in
returning a negative to Overture No. 6, leave to report.
"The question presented to this Assembly by Overture from the Presbytery of Ohio, ‘Is Baptism in
the Church of Rome Valid?’ is one of a very grave character, and of deep practical importance. The
answer to it must involve principles vital to the peace, the purity, and the stability of the church of God.
"After a full discussion carried through several days, this Assembly has decided, by a nearly
unanimous vote, that baptism so administered, is not invalid.
"Because, since baptism is an ordinance established by Christ in his Church, (Form of Gov., chap.
vii; Matt, xxviii. 19, 20,) and is to be administered only by a minister of Christ, duly called and ordained

<a id="ga15-p425"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=15 pdf_page=425 printed_page=null -->

to be a steward of the mysteries of God, (Directory, chap. viii, sec. 1.) it follows that no rite administered
by one who is not himself a duly ordained minister of the true Church of God visible, can be regarded as
an ordinance of Christ, whatever be the name by which it is called, whatever the form employed in its
administration. The so-called priest of the Romish communion are not ministers of Christ, for they are
commissioned as agents of the papal hierarchy, which is not a Church of Christ, but the Man of Sin,
apostate from the truth, the enemy of righteousness and of God. She has long lain under the curse of
God, who has called his people to come out from her, that they be not partakers of her plagues.
"It is the unanimous opinion of all the Reformed churches, that the whole papal body, though once a
branch of the visible church, has long since become utterly corrupt, and hopelessly apostate. It was a
conviction of this which led to the reformation, and the complete separation of the reformed body from
the papal communion. Luther and his coadjutors, being duly ordained presbyters at the lime when they
left the Romish communion, which then, though fearfully corrupt, was the only visible church in the
countries of their abode, were fully authorized by the word of God, to ordain successors in the ministry,
and so to extend and perpetuate the Reformed churches as true churches of Christ: while the
contumacious adherence of Rome to her corruptions, as shown in the decisions of the Council of Trent,
(which she adopts as authoritive,) cuts her off from the visible Church of Christ, as heretical and
unsound. This was the opinion of the Reformers, and it is the doctrine of the Reformed churches to this
day. In entire accordance to this is the decision of the General Assembly of our Church, passed in 1835,
(See minutes of General Assembly, vol. 8, p. 33) declaring the church of rome to bean apostate body.
"The decision by the Assembly of 1835 renders the return of a negative to the inquiry proposed by
the Presbytery of Ohio indispensable on the ground of consistency; unless we be prepared to admit, in
direct contradiction to the standards of the Presbyterian Church, that baptism is not an ordinance
established by Christ in his Church exclusively and that it may be administered by an agent of the Man of
Sin, an emissary of the prince of darkness; that it may be administered in sport or in blasphemy, and yet
be valid as though administered by a duly commissioned steward of the mysteries of God.
"Nor can it be urged that the papal hierarchy is improving in her character, and gradually
approximating to the scriptural standard. She claims to be infallible; her dogmas she promulgates as the
doctrines of heaven; and she pronounces her heaviest anathema against any and every man who questions
her authority, and refuses to bow to her decisions. She cannot recede from the ground she has assumed.
She has adopted as her own, the decisions of the Council of Trent, which degrade the word of God;
which claim equal authority for the Apocrypha as for the New Testament; and which declare the sense
held and taught by holy mother church, on the authority of tradition and of the Fathers, to be the true and
only sense of Scripture. All who deny this position, or who question her authority, she denounces with
the bitterest curses.
"She thus perverts the truth of God; she rejects the doctrine of justification by faith; she substitutes
human merit for the righteousness of Christ; and self-inflicted punishment for gospel repentence: She
proclaims her so-called baptism, to be regeneration, and the reception of the consecrated wafer in the
eucharist, to be the receiving of Christ himself, the source and fountain of grace, and with him all the
grace he can impart. Is this the truth? Is reliance on this system, true religion? Can, then, the papal body
be a Church?
"The Church, (i.e. the church visible,) as defined in our standards, is the whole body of those
persons, together with their children, who make profession of the holy religion of Christ, and of
submission to his laws. (Form of Gov. chap. ii, sec. 2) As certainly then, as the dogmas and practices of
papal Rome are not the holy religion of Christ, must it be conceded, that the papal body is not a Church
of Christ at all; and if not, then her agents, be they styled priest, bishops, archbishops, cardinals or pope,
are not ministers of Christ in any sense; for they have no connection with his true visible Church; and not
being true ministers of Christ, they have no power to administer Christian ordinances, and the rite they
call baptism, is not, in any sense, to be regarded as valid Christian Baptism.
"Further, by the perverted meaning they affix, and the superstitious rites they have superadded to
the ceremonies they perform under the name of baptism and the eucharist, the symbolical nature and true
design of both the ordinances of baptism and the Lord’s supper arc lost sight of and utterly destroyed, -
so that, could we by any possibility assign to her the name of a church, she would still be a church
without the two grand ordinances of the gospel: she neither adminsters Christian baptism, nor celebrates
the supper of our Lord.
"Moreover, since, by the 11th canon of the Council of Trent, she declares the efficacy of her
ordinances to depend upon the intention of the administrator, no man can know with certainty that her
form of administration in any ordinance is not a mere mockery: no consistent papist can be certain that
he has been duly baptized, or that he has received the veritable eucharist: he cannot know, that the priest
who officiates at his altar is a true priest, nor that there is actually any one true priest, or any one prelate

<a id="ga15-p426"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=15 pdf_page=426 printed_page=null -->

rightly consecrated in the whole papal communion. The papal hierarchy has by her own solemn act
shrouded all her doings in uncertainty, and enveloped all her rites in hopeless obscurity. Even on this
ground alone, the validity of her baptism might safely be denied.
"Nor is the fact that instances now and then occur of apparent piety in the members of her
communion, and of intelligence, zeal, and conscientiousness in some of her priests, any ground of
objection against the position here taken by this Assembly. The virtues of individuals do not purify the
body of which they are members. we are to judge of the character of a body claiming to be a church of
Christ, - not by the opinions or practices of its individual members, but by its standards and its allowed
practices. Bound as he is by the authority of his church, - and that on pain of her heaviest malediction, -
to understand the Scriptures only in the sense in which his church understands and explains them, a
consistent papist cannot receive or hold the true religion, or the doctrines of grace. If he does, he must
either renounce the papacy, or hypocritically conceal his true sentiments, or he must prepare to brave the
thunders of her wrath. True religion and an intelligent adherence to papal Rome are utterly incompatible
and impossible. The Church and the papacy are the repelling poles of the moral system.
"Difficulties may possibly arise in individual cases. It may not be easy at all times to say whether
an applicant for admission into the Church of Christ has, or has not been baptized: whether he has been
christened by a popish pastor or not. In all such doubtful cases the session of a church must act
according to the light before them. But it is safer and more conducive to peace and edification, to
embrace a well established principle for our guidance, and act upon it firmly in the fear of God, leaving
all consequences with him than to suffer ourselves, without any fixed principles, to beat the mercy of
circumstances.
"While some other churches may hesitate to carry out fully the principles of the Reformation, in
wholly repudiating popish baptism, as well as the popish mass, we, as Presbyterians, feel bound to act on
the principle laid down by our Assembly, so long ago as 1790, (see Digest, pp. 94, 95,) that, solon gas a
body is by us recognized as a true church, are her ordinances to be deemed valid, and no longer.
"In 1835 the Assembly declared the papacy to be apostate from Christ, and no true church. As we
do not recognize her as a portion of the visible Church of Christ, we cannot, consistently, view her
priesthood as other than usurpers of the Sacred functions of the ministry, her ordinances as unscriptural,
and her baptism as totally invalid."
2. The central portion of the report relating to Roman Catholic and Unitarian baptism (Minutes of the
General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church, U.S., 1871, p. 30).
Our Church has always held, agreeably to the Scripture, that the administration of baptism may
present irregularities or imperfections which are not to be approved, but the sacrament may still have
substantial validity. It is plain from Scripture, that baptism has by the Lord Jesus Christ been given to
His true visible Church catholic (see Matt. XXVIII, 19, 20; Acts ii, 41, 42; I. Cor. xii, 13; Book of
Government, Chap. VII; Directory for Worship, Chap. VII, Sec.l), and cannot be out of her pale. The
administration of this sacrament maybe in two ways invalidated; either by the apostasy of the body
wherein it is exercised, so that this society is no true part of Christ’s visible Church; or by the utter
change of corruption of the element and doctrine of the sacrament. And our Assemblies have correctly
held, that the form called by the Popish communion "Christian baptism" has ceased, for both reasons, to
be valid; because that society is declared in Scripture to be antichrist, and Babylon, and apostate, out of
which the Lord requireth His "people to come, that they may not be partakers of her plagues;" and
because she hath, with superstitious design, substituted a mixed element in place of water, which Christ
ordained to be used as the emblem, and hath utterly corrupted the doctrine of holy baptism into an
incantation working ex opere operato.
In other societies, as the Unitarian, their rites may have due regularity of outward form, and yet be
no valid baptism, because their bodies are not true parts of Christ’s visible Church. The validity of such
cases therefore depends upon the claim of the communion in which they are administered to be true
churches of jesus Christ. But the scriptural mark of a true church is its holding forth the Word of God.
(See Rom. iii. 2; 1 Tim. iii. 15; book of Government, Chap. II, Sec. II; confession of Faith, Chap. XXV,
Sec. III.)
In view of the fact that several churches hold grave errors in connection with much saving truth, and
that perhaps no church receives in everything the exact mind of the Spirit, it may be asked with what
degree of strictness or liberality this mark of a true visible Church is to be applied. it seems to us
consonant with the scriptures and the judgment of charity to answer, that so long as any communion so
retains the essential truths of God’s Word and the aids of the Holy Ghost as to save souls by its
ministrations, it shall beheld a true, though imperfect, member of His visible body. Though it may omit
or impugn some principles which we have received from God, and may'even deny to our ordinances all
recognition, and to our communion all church character, yet we may not imitate its uncharitableness; so

<a id="ga15-p427"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=15 pdf_page=427 printed_page=null -->

long as Christ visibly entrusts it with His saving Word and Spirit, we are bound to recognize it as His
visible body, notwithstanding its errors, and to pray for its attainment of a more peaceable unity in the
bonds of the truth. but in judging the tendency of its ordinances to save souls, it is obviously proper that
we shall estimate those ministrations as a consistent whole, as set forth by this communication. If their
only tendency as a whole, taken as it expounds them to its members, is destructive to souls, then we
cannot admit that it is a pillar and ground of saving truth, merely because of some disjointed fragments of
the gospel verities, mixed with heresies which, if heartily accepted by the people as taught, must be fatal
to souls; or because a few persons, through the special teaching of God’s Spirit, leading them to select
the spiritual meat and reject the poison, actually find Christ under those ministrations; for the proper
funcdon of a visible Church is instrumentally to communicate to its disciples spiritual discernment, and
not to presuppose it; and the happy escape of these souls from damnable error is due to the special grace
of God shielding them against the regular effect of these ministrations, rather than employing and
blessing them. If this rule of judgment be denied, then might a valid church character possibly be
established for an association of infidels invesrigating parts of God’s Word only for purposes of cavil,
since the Almighty Spirit might, against these purposes, employ those parts of the Word to awaken and
convert some member.

minority report

Ad Hoc Committee to Study the Validity of Certain Baptisms

introduction
the evident desire and determination of all the members of the ad hoc study committee to draw a
clear line of separation between truth and untruth, or be it, between orthodoxy and heterodoxy/heresy, is
both proper and praiseworthy. Because there is no question among us as to the flagrant apostasy of the
Roman Catholic church, consideration of R.C. baptism gives us a test case for the principle involved in
discerning what constitutes a valid baptism. By extention, these principles can be used in other cases.
brief historical comment
a study of church history shows that a solid majority of presbyterian churches and, almost without
exception, all Reformed churches have held Roman Catholic baptism to be valid. Since the time of
Thomwell, American Presbyterianism has largely tended to regard Roman Catholic baptism as invalid;
prior to that time, however, most of American Presbyterianism was in harmony with other Reformed and
Presbyterian bodies in this matter. The church has historically not rebaptized those who have fallen away
from the faith, been excommunicated, and subsequently repented. Historically, the church has not
required rebaptism for those who were baptized by ministers who subsequently proved to be apostate.
More recently, the 1981 (159th) General Synod of the Reformed Presbyterian Church, Evangelical Synod
endorsed the validity of Roman Catholic baptism. In this, the Synod concurred with the vigorous and
definitive dissent by Charles Hodge to the decision of the 1845 Assembly of the Presbyterian Church to
declare Roman Catholic baptism invalid. (Hodge, "Validity of Romish Baptism" in Church Polity).
confessional and biblical consideration S: validity versus regularity of
Propriety
As helpful as Church history may be on this issue, it is to the Scriptures and to our subordinate
standards to which we should principally look for direction. When we consider Biblical and
Confessional teachings, we must give careful attention to the distinction which is central to resolution of
this issue: whether a baptism is irregular or improper (a matter of regularity or propriety) and the related
question of whether the baptism was valid or efficacious. Confusion of these two matters has made more
difficult the resolution of this baptismal controversy. Specifically, in order to establish that a certain
baptism was invalid, it is not sufficient simply to demonstrate it to have been irregularly administered.
For example, our Standards teach that a baptism administered by immersion is improper, yet valid.
(WCF 28:3)
Consider the principles taught in Exodus 4:24-26, wherein God had started to kill Moses for his
deliberate omission of the circumcising of his son. To prevent the Lord from slaying Moses, his wife
Zipporah (a Midianitess) quickly administered the sacrament. This administration of circumcision was
highly irreguler, yet it was regarded by God as valid for immediately the Lord’s wrath was turned away.
In his Commentary on Exodus Calvin comments as follows:
Certainly the child was not duly (or regularly) circumcised; and still it is plain
from the event, that the ceremony thus rashly performed, pleased God; for it is
immediately added that ‘He let him go’.

<a id="ga15-p428"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=15 pdf_page=428 printed_page=null -->

If the highly irregular circumcision performed by the unordained, female Midianitess Zipporah was
valid, how much more so, felt Calvin, are the less irregular baptisms performed by the ordained, male
priests of the Church of Rome. Despite the highly irregular nature of Romish baptism, Roman Catholic...
....children derive some benefit from baptism, when being ingrafted into the body
of the church, they are made an object of greater interest to the other members. Then,
when they have grown up, they are thereby strongly urged to an earnest desire of
serving God, Who has received them as sons by the formal symbol of adoption, before,
from nonage, they were able to recogize Him as their Father..." (Calvin, Institutes,
IV: 16)
the sign versus the thing signified
An additional complication in clarifying the issues involved has been the lack of care, at times, to
differentiate between the sign (outwardly applied) of the sacrament and the thing signified (inwardly
effected); WCF 27:2. In Calvin’s expression, the sacrament is one thing, the power of the sacrament is
another. It is God Himself who sovereignly applies the inward grace promised in the observance of the
sacrament whose outward sign is applied to the recipient by the administrator, in accordance with Divine
command (Larger Catechism 163). Neither the piety nor the intention of the administrator of the
sacrament have a bearing on the validity of the sacrament; its efficacy depends exclusively upon the
work of the Holy Spirit (Westminster Confession of Faith 27:3; 28:6,7,; LC 161, 164, 176, and Scripture
cited therein.) Although there is an intimate connection between the human action and the divine grace,
so that one is not separate from the other, a sharp distinction must be recognized so that one is never
merged into the other.
the council of trent and the question of apostasy by the church of
ROM E
It has been argued by some that Calvin and other Reformers were viewing a Roman Catholic
Church not yet "officially'' apostatized, and therefore could countenance their baptism as valid, though
highly irregular. Some argue that until the Council of Trent, the Church of Rome was not apostate. The
Council of Trent met from 1545 to 1563. It defined the Roman Catholic position on the sacraments in
1547. This was well before the final edition of the Institutes in 1559. Prior to Trent, Calvin and the other
Reformers were fully aware of the departure from the faith by the Roman Catholic Church. They
certainly did not await the outcome of the Council of Trent before pronouncing the judgment of God
upon that Church’s apostasy. It is clear that they recognized, even as we should also, that Trent did not
change the Roman Catholic doctrine of baptism. It is therefore instructive to note Calvin’s comments on
the parallelism between the apostate Church of Rome and the apostate Israel:
As in ancient times, there remained among the Jews special privileges of a
Church, so in the present day we do not deny to the Papists those vestiges of a church
which the Lord has allowed to remain among them amid the dissipation...Such, then, is
the certainty and constancy of the divine goodness, that the covenant of the Lord
continued there (among the Israelites) and His faith could not be obliterated by their
perfidy; nor could circumcision be so profaned by their impure hands as not still to be a
true sign and sacrament of His covenant Hence, children who were bom to them the
Lord called His own (Ezekiel 16:20), though, unless by special blessing, they in no
respect belonged to Him. So, having deposited His covenant in Gaul, Italy, Germany,
Spain, and England, when these countries were oppressed by the tyranny of the (papal)
Antichrist, He, in order that His covenant might remain inviolable, first preserved
baptism there as an evidence of the covenant; baptism which, consecrated by His lips,
retains its power in spite of human depravity." (Institutes, IV:2:11)
The priests and the people of Israel turned from serving the Lord unto idolatry and wantoness, so
that the Lord removed Himself from them (Jeremiah; Ezekiel.) But God is true unto His own oath and
His covenanted faithfulness is everlasting (Ezekiel 16:60ff).
god ’S faithfulness and the question of the worthy administrator
it is on the grounds of God's faithfulness that Calvin affirms,
...Moreover, if we have rightly determined that a sacrament is not to be estimated
by the hand of him by whom it is administered, but is to be received as from the hand
of God Himself, from Whom it undoubtedly proceeded, we may hence infer that its
dignity neither gains nor loses by the administrator... this confutes the error of the
Donatists, who measured the efficacy and worth of the sacrament by the dignity of the
minister. Such in the present day are our catabaptists (rebaptizers) who deny that we
are duly baptized, because we were baptized in the Papacy by wicked men and
idolaters; hence, they furiously insist on anabaptism (rebaptism). Against these

<a id="ga15-p429"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=15 pdf_page=429 printed_page=null -->

absurdities we shall be sufficiently fortified if we reflect that by baptism we were
initiated not into the name of any man, but into the Name of the Father, and the Son,
and the Holy Spirit; and, therefore, that baptism is not of man, but of God, by
whomsoever it may have been administered. (Institutes, 1559 edition, IV: 15:16-17)
To say that Calvin regarded Roman Catholic baptism (or certain other baptisms) as valid is not to
say that he thought such baptisms should have been administered or that they were proper baptisms. But
it was his view that once administered, the baptism was valid and irrepeatable, even if highly irregular.
This is also the position of Augustine who did batde with the Donatists. This sect tended to identify the
invisible church (the elect) with the visible church (a mixed multitude); an imperfect church was no
church at all; and the loss of personal perfection by a minister invalidated any sacraments administered
by him. To the Donatists Augustine replied, "Baptism belongs to Christ, regardless of who may give
(administer) it." (A. Pclikan, The Christian Tradition: the emergence of the catholic Tradition,
Chicago, 1971, Vol. I, p. 311)
THE CHURCH DETERMINES THE VALIDITY OR PROPRIETY OF BAPTISMS

Whereas God alone determines the efficacy (inward, spiritual grace) signified by the outward signs,
it is the Church itself which must ministerially determine the validity and regularity or propriety of
baptisms, in the same manner as it determines the validity (credibility) of professions of faith of those
seeking membership in the Church. For, it was to the Church itself that Christ assigned the authority of
the keys of the Kingdom and the responsibility of carrying out His Great Commission (Matt. 28:18-20).
As the report of the 159th General Synod of the RPCES correctly observed, the church thus extends or
withholds the sacraments in its declaratory and ministerial capacity as the God-appointed pillar and
foundation of God’s truth (I Tim. 3:15). The Church ministerially declares administration of the
sacraments to be valid (or, invalid) on the basis of the presence (or absence) of outward, discernible
elements which constitute the criteria for validity (Larger Catechism 163). It is not, therefore, the
prerogative of individuals within the church, nor of recipients of the sacrament to declare a baptism to be
valid or invalid.
CRITERIA OF VALIDITY AND CRITERIA OF REGULARITY
However helpful and informative it may be to consider historical instances in the Scriptures, it is
principally to explicit, verbal instructions that we must look in order to establish Biblical criteria. As a
confessional church, we seek guidance from the Confessional Standards as reliable summaries of that
which the Scriptures teach. The following criteria are determinative of validity, and must therefore be
present in the administration of baptism: (By their very nature, extraordinary cases are those which do
not follow the rule, but our concern is to set forth which criteria are those which Scripture specifies).
1. Administered in the most Holy Name of the Trinity: Father, Son and Holy Spirit (Matt. 28:19;
WCF 2:3). This formula may be expressed occasionally in the name of Christ Jesus as
mediatorial representative of the Trinity (for example, Acts 2:38).
2. With water (Matt. 3:11; 28:19; John 1:33; 3:5; L.C. 177). It may be noted that application of
oil as symbolic of the Spirit is exemplified in Scripture.
3. Unto those who profess faith in, and obedience unto, Christ; or unto children of those
professing faith in Christ. (Gen. 17-7-9; Acts 2:31-39; I Cor. 7:14; L.C. 155; WCF 28:4,
14:1,2, and especially 14:3 with regard to the nature of the faith required.)
4. administered by a lawfully ordained minister of the gospel (WCF 27:4; I Cor. 4:1; 11:23;
Heb. 5:4; Rom. 15:8.).
Besides these essential criteria which determine the validity of the baptism, other conditions should
be met for the baptism to be regarded as proper or regular. Although not exhaustive, the following list
include those elements which should be present in the administration of baptism for it to be regarded as
regular or proper:
1. within the bound sofa body bearing the mark sofa true church of jesus Christ. (Matt. 28:19-
20; I Cor. 1:2; 12:12-13; Eph. 4:11-13)
2. By sprinkling or pouring. (Isaiah 52:15; Acts 2:17; Eph. 5:26; Hebrews 9:18-23; 10:22;
12:24; WCF 28:3)
THE BURDEN OF INVESTIGATING PREVIOUS BAPTISMS
A session which wishes to carry out its God-given responsibilities with sensitivity and
conscientiousness may find the task of investigating previous baptisms a heavy and, at times, an
impracticable one. As noted in the aforementioned report adopted by the 159th General Synod of the
RPCES, "The process of investigation through the dim past, searching out such things as faith or the lack
of it in deceased priest or parents, will convince one that only God knows the heart. Dr. Buswell wisely
wrote... ‘The value of participation depends wholly upon its institution by Christ, and not in the slightest
degree upon the human channel by which it is administered.’ If we are not careful, none of us will know

<a id="ga15-p430"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=15 pdf_page=430 printed_page=null -->

for sure if we have been baptized. Likewise, i four salvation rested on th equality of our faith rather than
faith’s perfect object, we could not truly know if we are saved...God has not left us in such confusing
positions. We can know we are saved and we can know we are baptized." Recognizing that the Church
of rome is not rue Church, yet the RPCES report continued:
if a baptism comes from within a christian tradition where the trinity is understood and jesus
is accepted as the One Who came in the flesh and where He is designated the Savior, we urge
acceptance of that baptism as valid. Thus, we reject outrightly the baptism of cults who stand
outside the stream of catholic history. There is a distinct difference between contrived imitations
and Roman distortions... We express our firm outrage that so many of its (Roman Catholic)
communicants have been taught to trust in the sacraments themselves and to give lip-service to the
atoning sacrifice of the Savior. The truth of God has been slighted, but the enemy of God has not
had a thorough victory.
recommendations
1. That the Assembly receive both the Committee and the Minority Reports, commending them to the
attention of its churches and lower courts as information.
2. That the Assembly leave decisions in these matters to be made, on a case by case basis, by the
lower courts, subject to normal review and control or judicial processes.
3. That the Assembly discharge the Committee with thanks.
