Source PDF: https://www.pcahistory.org/pca/digest/studies/2-118.pdf
Extraction note: PCA Historical Center PDF text matched and reconstructed from local GA minutes slices for audit.

--- 15th GA (1987), Church/State report Part II, pp. 443–448: ga15_1987 lines 24376-24502 ---

members would make it necessary to pay for two or more teams of attorneys in the
absence of written consent to joint representation. Furthermore, litigation initiated by
an unincorporated ministry in many states must be filed in the names of individual
members rather than the association, and the defendant often will file a third-party
claim against some or all individual members.
3. Convenience in Holding Property. An incorporated ministry finds it much easier
to hold property than an unincorporated association. This is both because property can
beheld in the corporate name instead of in the names of all members, and because
transfers of property are easier to accomplish with far fewer legal documents
necessary. Although it is possible for an unincorporated ministry to hold property in
trust, that is also more cumbersome because of the additional documents necessary for
property transfers, and because of the almost inevitable omission of some future-
acquired property under the trust terms. Moreover, as pointed out below, property held
by a trust is subject to charitable trust regulations in some states that do not apply to
religious ministry property held by an incorporated ministry.
4. Availability of Financing. An incorporated ministry has the option of issuing
church bonds (if it complies with applicable securities laws), whereas an
unincorporated ministry cannot issue bonds in most jurisdictions. A corporation also
can more readily borrow significant funds through aline of creditor a long-term loan,
whereas an unincorporated ministry either cannot feasibly do so or generally can
borrow funds only with personal guaranties of wealthy members or officers.
5. Limitation of Charitable Trust Regulation. Charitable trust statutes generally do
not apply to incorporated ministries other than for specific trusts that they establish,
whereas they do apply directly to all property of unincorporated ministries that choose
a trust form. On the other hand, common law trust requirements would apply equally
to charitable corporations and trusts.
6. Better Protection of the Organizational Nam e. A corporate name is generally
easier to protect legally than an unincorporated association name. Although a fictitious

2 6 Wendell R. Bird, "O ugh t christian ministries in corporate?" (Atlanta, ga , no date), pp. 2-4.

<a id="ga15-p447"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=15 pdf_page=447 printed_page=null -->

name can be reserved, in most states that filing must be made in each county, whereas
the corporate name is reserved for the entire state.

There are also certain legal disadvantages of incorporation. These are also summarized by Wendell
Bird:27

LEGAL DISADVANTAGES OF INCORPORATION
1. Expenses and Formalities for Corporations. Incorporation does involve filing
and legal costs for establishment, amendment, and dissolution. However, generally
higher costs are incurred in drafting professional legal documents for a charitable trust
or for an unincorporated association, although these can be amended and dissolved
more easily if necessary. An annual form must be filed by corporations in most states
to maintain corporate status, but many states require similar filings by trusts, and the
federal tax forms are the same for all forms of organization. Although minutes are
required for corporations, such minutes ordinarily would be kept for all other forms of
organization. Although statutory requirements exist for corporations, most
requirements in most states are only presumptive and a nonprofit corporation may
select contrary provisions.
2. Constitutional Protections and Governmental Regulations for Corporations. In
general, corporate status does not reduce the constitutional protections enjoyed by
religious ministries. The First and Fourteenth Amendments recognize the same
protection for religious corporations, trusts, and associations. Corporate status also
does not increase the governmental regulations applicable to a ministry in comparison
with the regulations that would be applicable in trust or unincorporated association
form:
Employment standards, discrimination laws and requirements concerning withholding
of income taxes for employees apply to associations whether incorporated or not
Finally, when state and local taxation is levied upon an association, it is usually
unaffected by the group’s corporate status.*
The same is true with securities laws, charitable disclosure laws, labor laws. Social
Security and unemployment compensation and other federal taxes, sales and use and
other taxes, and property and intangibles and other local taxes.

* J. Jacobs, Association Law Handbook 15 (1981). Accord, B. Hopkins, the law of Tax-Exempt
Organizations 503 (3d ed . 1979); H. O leck, Non-Profit Corporations, Organizations and Associations 18 (3d
ed. 1974); G . Webster, the law of associations 2-3 (rev. ed. 1976); see G . lamb & C. shield s, Trade
Association Law and Practice 185 (rev. ed. 1971).

III. Current Problems with Ecclesiastical Incorporation
Your committee recognized that while the historic concept of incorporation is rooted in Christian
history, nonetheless there are serious contemporary problems with corporate theory and practice, which
are of legitimate concern to the Christian. Perhaps the two central problems most discussed among
conservative christian critics of incorporation are the ethical question of corporate "limited liability" and
the allegedly "implied subordination" of the incorporated church to the state.2*
As to the very real ethical problem of corporate limited liability, this committee feels that it is not
our task to enter into either the generalities or specifics of this matter which largely devolves upon
secular corporations. This is a legitimate and important task, but it is not our task. wear ep resend y
concerned only with the ethics of the church as an incorporation, and presumably there is no accusation
that the church has been using the tool of limited liability in any unethical way.
The real concern over church incorporation (as for instance in the Oklahoma Presbytery overture)
would seem rather to be a fear of implied subordination to the secular state. This committee believes that
while it is certainly possible for a given church to concede too much to the secular state in its particular
incorporation procedures, nevertheless, the mere fact of legal incorporation by no means has to imply a
recognition of statist authority over the church. But what would be the appropriate response if a church
was felt to have conceded too much in its incorporation papers?

27 Ibid., pp. 4-6.
28 see article by north (Footnote 1).

<a id="ga15-p448"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=15 pdf_page=448 printed_page=null -->

IV. Suggested Solutions to the Problems Raised by Ecclesiastical Incorporation
First, your committee believes that problems and abuses connected with modem statist ideas of
incorporation do not justify jettisoning the entire, age-old concept. It is not proper "to throw out the baby
with the bath water." For the church to be incorporated is to say no more and no less than to confess that
the church is a divinely ordained institution, which looks to God-not to the state-for its right to exist and
to handle its own affairs with integrity. Historically, the civil government has simply recognized the
corporate rights and independent jurisdiction of the church in its own realm as a previously existing fact
(a fact not created by the state, but rather given by God and merely recognized by the state). At the same
time, the Church recognizes the state as a divinely ordained institution, and realizes that certain
transactions and relationships of the church within the body politic and with the civil government itself
have properly been recognized and regularized in terms of specific legal procedures.
Therefore, when a church ina particular country seeks incorporation it is not necessarily doing
anything other than specifying in mutually accessible legal terms that which already exists by divine
right. To do such has nothing to do with a subordination of the Body of Christ to the civil authority.
Incorporation is not subordination, but the recognition of mutually independent jurisdictions. This, at
any rate, is the general situation.
Some in our denomination, however, are of the opinion that the Certificate of Incorporation of the
PCA in Delaware concedes too much authority to the state and implies an inappropriate subordination to
civil government. Those who hold this view should propose amendments to our Certificate of
Incorporation rather than seeking to dissolve the incorporation of our denomination. Prior to proposal of
these amendments, however, they should be studied by competent legal counsel for tax and constitutional
implications.
Moreover, we need to keep in mind that as Bird has pointed out, "In general, corporate status does
not reduce the constitutional protections enjoyed by religious ministries." Or to state this negatively, a
church’s being unincorporated does not in the least remove it from having to deal with the same laws and
regulations faced by an incorporated church in an increasingly secularized society. To the contrary, to be
unincorporated may in fact cause the church more practical problems than to be incorporated. The real
problem is of course not with incorporation but with humanistic secularization. The church must use all
the means within its power (including incorporation) to maintain its right to preach and practice the
Gospel in order to reverse the secularism of our time. For these reasons your committee recommends
that the Presbyterian Church in America retain its incorporated status.
