APPENDIX II

DIVORCE RECONSIDERED

by RE David C. Lachman

The Ad Interim Committee on Marriage, Divorce, and Remarriage is submitting
a lengthy report to the Nineteenth General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America. The committee was requested to "ask whether the Westminster Confession
Chapter 24.6 is more lax or more restrictive than Scripture” and to "suggest any
revisions to that article of the Confession it deems appropriate," particularly addressing
the question "whether a Christian may have other legitimate grounds for divorce,
besides desertion by an unbelieving spouse, or adultery (for example, inveterate
physical abuse, marital rape or other sexual abuse, attempted murder, or equally serious
violations of the marriage covenant)." It was also asked to "Recommend guidelines and
resources for pastoral care and counsel of couples with marital difficulties,..." [etc.]
The committee's proposed report considers the Confession historically, discusses
Scriptural perspectives and suggests guidelines and resources for pastoral care and
counsel.

Taken as a whole, the report can be characterized as a significant departure from
previous Reformed teaching, both in suggesting that "wilful desertion in the
Westminster Confession can be more broadly interpreted than has previously been
believed (p. 2319) and in maintaining that, in Scripture, abandonment by an unbeliever
can mean more than simple physical departure, (pp. 2345-6) It even maintains "that the
believing spouse may initiate legal action to make her biblical divorce legal in the eyes
of the state," explaining that an abuser can be held to have deserted the spouse, declared
an unbeliever and then treated accordingly, (pp. 2381-1) The practical section of the
report reflects this deviation.

It should be clearly understood that this report, for all its language of restraint, is
a substantial departure from what has hitherto been believed to be the Reformed and
Biblical teaching. Historically, opinion has been divided, but between those who
denied the possibility of divorce entirely, those who believed divorce permissible on the
ground of adultery (both with and without the possibility of remarriage), and those who
added desertion to adultery. It is only recently that grounds of divorce have been
substantially expanded, first by liberals and then by various others. Though
conservatively worded, this is the position taken by the Committee's report.

This article will focus on the historical part of the report, both because the
material presented is less familiar and less accessible and an erroneous interpretation
can thus more readily be imposed on even the careful reader and because what is new in
the report is the claim that modern 'Reformed' expansion of Biblical grounds for divorce
has historical Reformed precedent. The Biblical material, with the various arguments
respecting its interpretation, is readily available and does not need to be duplicated here.

<a id="ga20-p623"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=625 printed_page=623 -->

I. Historical

The Committee's report claims that there is no need to revise the Confession,
since the Confession reflects a range of beliefs which would allow the position the
Committee recommends. But its historical paper, though presented with an impressive
scholarly apparatus, completely fails to sustain the position taken.

V. Adultery or fornication committed after a contract, being
detected before marriage, giveth just occasion to the innocent
party to dissolve that contract. In the case of adultery after
marriage, it is lawful for the innocent party to sue out a divorce:
and, after the divorce, to marry another, as if the offending party
were dead.

VI. Although the corruption of man be such as is apt to study
arguments unduly to put asunder those whom God hathjoined
together in marriage: yet nothing but adultery, or such wilful
desertion as can no way be remedied by the Church or civil
magistrate, is cause sufficient of dissolving the bond of marriage:
wherein, a public and orderly course of proceeding is to be
observed; and the persons concerned in it not left to their own
wills and discretion, in their own case. (Westminster Confession of Faith, XXIV, 5 & 6)

according to the Westminster Confession of Faith only "adultery, or such wilful
desertion" as can not be remedied dissolves "the bond of marriage.” Historically, the
WCF has been interpreted as meaning such physical abandonment as removes the
deserting party deserting both from the discipline of the church, which would lead to
repentance and restoration, and from the coercion of the state, with punishment
appropriate to the crime. The assumption has been understood to be that the guilty
party is no longer resident in the bounds of the state and therefore cannot be brought to
justice, either ecclesiastical or civil.

Since a confession consists of necessity of brief, pithy statements, in the absence
of an accompanying commentary or detailed report of any discussion or debate which
led to the final draft of a statement (The minutes of the sessions of the westminster
assembly of Divines, ed. A.F. Mitchell and J. Struthers, Edinburgh, 1874, pp. 279-80 &
299-300 are brief and informative), further inquiry into their meaning must of necessity
resort to contemporary works on the subject. To this end a brief study will be made of
the opinions of several influential English Puritan divines, particularly those writing
prior to the Westminster Assembly. Reference will also be made to the influential
Christian Directory of Richard Baxter, composed not long after the Assembly, and to
Continental Reformed thought as well.

The great sixteenth century Puritan William Perkins has been quoted at length in
the Committee's report, though without drawing any explicit conclusion. It correctly
cites J. I. Packer as judging Perkins "to have permitted divorce and remarriage to the
innocent spouse in the case of desertion and that desertion was understood by him 'to

<a id="ga20-p624"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=626 printed_page=624 -->

cover all behavior that nullified the matrimonial relationship in practice,' such as the
imposition of intolerable conditions." (p. 2313, footnote 24) Packer himself goes so far
as to say that Perkins regarded "desertion, broadly interpreted to cover all behaviour
that nullified the matrimonial relationship in practice —'malicious desertion', when 'they
require of each other intolerable conditions', 'long absence', cruelty, diseased conditions,
and insanity are specified - as ground for the same grant" of divorce. (A Quest for
Godliness, Wheaton, 1990, p. 269; without substantiation he claims the Puritans
followed Perkins in this.) But Packer's claim is without foundation in Perkins. (It is
questionable if he has even bothered to consult Perkins at all. He appears to have read
and followed M. M. Knapper's Tudor Puritanism, Chicago, 1939, uncritically, even to
the point of citing page references in Perkins back to front). For Perkins allows the
dissolution of a marriage contract for such reasons as the discovery of an incurable
disease, such as would be an impediment to performance of marital duties, and in the
case of insanity. But when he passes on from the chapter dealing with 'Of Rejection, or
Refusall of the Contract' to 'Of Marriage', he expressly denies them to be reason for
divorce. (The Workes, Cambridge, 1618, compare pages 682-4 with 687-8).

What, then, did Perkins teach? In addition to divorce for adultery, Perkins
clearly allows the believing wife (or husband) to remarry when the unbelieving or
heretical husband (or wife) forsakes her and will no longer dwell with her, though only
after "all good means" have been used to bring him to repentance. He cites 1 Cor. 7:15
as the basis for teaching that such behavior is that which dissolves a marriage. But
when there is desertion between two believers,

The faulty person, who is the cause of this desertion, is to be forced by
course of Civill, and Ecclesiasticall censure, to performe his, or her duty.
Upon which proceeding, if he remain obstinate, & perverse in will; the
other must in patience, and earnest prayer unto God, wait the time, until
his mind may be changed, and he made to relent by the order of the
Magistrate. But if the one of them, by just occasion of feare, be
compelled to depart from the other: and cannot retume againe without
apparent danger of life; in this case they are not bound to return; but the
delinquent party is to remain solitary, till they be instructed & made
willing to doe their duties: and in the meane while, the party innocent
must be resolved that God hath called him or her to single life.

Againe, be it that the one is resolutely unwilling to dwell with the
other, and thereupon flies away without any fault of the other: if the
thing after a long space be sufficiently knowne before-hand, and all
possible meanes have been used, to reclaime the guilty person; yea being
called, he doth not personally appeare before the Judge, to yeeld a reason
of the fact; after publike and solemne declaration made, the Minister
upon such desertion, may pronounce the marriage to be dissolved. For he
that upon malice flieth away from his mate, is to be holden in the same
tearms with an unbeleever, who departs upon detestation of religion, and
the service of God, I. Tim. 5.8 (pp. 687-8)

<a id="ga20-p625"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=627 printed_page=625 -->

Having considered 'Desertion', Perkins goes on to consider the "malicious and
spitefull dealing of married folkes one with the other."

Malicious dealing is, when dwelling together, they require each of other
intollerable conditions: & when the one doth not regard nor releeve the
other, beeing in danger or extremity, as is meete. For this is as much as
to betray one anothers estate and life to their utter enemies.
Here it may be demaunded, what a beleever should doe, who is in
certaine and imminent danger, either of losse of life, or breach of
conscience, if they both abide together.
Ans. I. This certaine danger hath his originall, either from one that is a
stranger, or from one of the parties: If from a stranger, then the husband
either takes upon him the defence of his beleeving wife, or not; if he
doth, then she ought to abide with him. If not, she may depart and
provide for her own safety. II. Againe, if the husband threateneth hurt,
the beleeving wife may flie in this case; and it is all one, as if the
unbeleeving man should depart. For to depart from one, and drive away
by threats, are equipollent, (p. 688)

That this is the case should not seem strange, for if the believer has a choice of
denying Christ or continuing with the unbelieving partner, separation from the
unbeliever must be the choice. But, in answer to the allegation that this makes the
believing wife to forsake "the unbeleeving husband, which she may not doe," Perkins
answers that "She forsakes him not finally, but leaves him for a time." (p. 688)

This is consonant with what Perkins says in his 'A Godly and Learned
Exposition of Christ's Sermon in the Mount'. In commenting on Matthew 5: 31-2, he
poses the objection based on 1 Corinthians 7: 15,
Here (say they) is another cause of divorce.
Ans. The malitious or wilfull departing of the unbeleever, doth dissolve
the mariage; but that is no cause of giving a bill of divorce: onely
adulterie causeth that. Here the beleever is a meere patient, and the
divorce is made by the unbeleever, who unjustly forsaketh, and so puts
away the other. (Workes, 1618, III, p. 69)

After denying that "a contagious and incurable disease" is grounds for divorce,
he even denies that physical cruelty which goes the length of attempted murder is
sufficient cause for divorce:

Object. But married persons may seeke to spill the blood one of
another, and therefore it is good to give a bil of divorce, to prevent that
evill. Ans. su chen mi tie may cause a separation fora time, til
reconciliation be made, but the bond of mariage must not therefore be
broken, (p. 69)

<a id="ga20-p626"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=628 printed_page=626 -->

He also denies that other similar causes are grounds for divorce. Speaking of 1
Cor. 7:10-1, Perkins comments:

Here (say they) is a plaine place against marriage after
divorcement. Answ. TTte Apostle speaketh of departure, and putting
away, for other causes then adulterie; as for hatred, dislike, &c. which
indeed are no sufficient causes of divorce, and therefore they that
separate thereupon, ought not to marrie. (pp. 70-1)

We may conclude, therefore, that Perkins is consistent both with himself and
with what has hitherto been considered the Reformed teaching. He allows divorce for
adultery and irremediable physical abandonment, but not for any other cause, including
disease, hatred and even attempted murder.

William Ames, a highly esteemed early seventeenth century Puritan, in a
passage not quite clear either in the English translation or the Latin original, seems to
follow Perkins. In addition to adultery, he clearly allows divorce in the case of
desertion:

An obstinate desertion, although in the party deserting, it
containeth no just cause of making a divorce, yet it makes a faire cause
for the party deserted, after the triall of all other meanes in vaine, to
suffer a divorce, 1 Cor. 7:15.

he goes onto say:

The great danger, which one party may bee in by the cruelty of
the other, or by any other manifest meanes of cohabitation, may bee just
cause of retiring for a time, so to provide for his owne safety and
security, but not for an absolute desertion, unlesse first hee bee deserted.
For if one party drive away the other with great fierceness and cruelty,
there is cause of desertion, and hee is to be reputed the deserter. But if
hee obstinately neglect, that necessary departure of the other avoyding
the eminent danger, he himselfe in that playeth the deserter.
(<Conscience with the Power and Cases Thereof, London, 1643, pp. 108-
9)

In the case of physical cruelty, Ames asserts that the deserter is the party driving
the other away. But he does not go on to reflect on this as a cause for divorce and thus
can not be cited in support of making the desertion resulting from physical abuse a
ground of divorce.

William Gouge, the only Westminster divine to publish on the subject, is
particularly important to the purpose at hand, both in that he was a highly respected
member of the Assembly and in that he wrote particularly to the point in question.
Gouge acknowledges adultery as grounds for divorce: "Concerning Adultery, we deny
not, but that it giveth just cause of divorce: but withall we say (as wee have good

<a id="ga20-p627"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=629 printed_page=627 -->

warrant from Christs words) that it is the only cause of just divorce." 'Of Domestic
Duties' in The Workes, London, 1627, pp. 136-7, II, ii, 16)

Gouge speaks at some length about desertion:

The vice contrary to matrimonial unity is Desertion, when one of
the maried couple through indignation of the true religion, and utter
detestation thereof, or some other like cause, shall apparently renounce
all matrimonial unity, & withdraw him or her selfe from all society with
the other, and live among Infidels, Idolaters, heretiques, or other such
persecutors, as a faithfull Christian with safety of life, or a good
conscience, cannot abide among: and though all good meanes that can
be thought of be used to reclaime the party so departed, yet nothing will
prevaile, but obstinatly persisteth in renouncing all matrimoniall
fellowship.

This Desertion is in the case of mariage so capitall, as it ffeeth
the innocent party from any further seeking after the other. ... That
Desertion therefore on the delinquents part is such a dissolution of
mariage, as freeth the innocent party from the bondage thereof. In many
reformed Churches beyond the seas Desertion is accounted so farre to
disolve the very bond of mariage, as liberty is given to the party forsaken
to mary another; and it is also applied to other cases then that which is
above mentioned: as when an Infidel, Idolater, or Heretique shall depart
from one of the true religion for other causes then hatred of religion: or
when both man and wife having lived as Idolaters among Idolaters, one
of them being converted to the true faith, leaveth his abode among
Idolaters, and goeth to the professors of the true faith, but can by no
meanes get the other party to remove: or when one of the true religion
shall depart from another of the same profession, and will by no meanes
bee brought to live with the party so left, but openly manifesteth
peremptory obstinacy, the matter being heard and adjudged by the
magistrate, the mariage-bond may be broken: and liberty given to the
party forsaken to mary another. But because our Church hath no such
custome, nor our law determined such cases, I leave them to the custome
of other Churches. (Ibid., 125-6; II, ii, 3)

While Gouge does not go so far as to adopt the position taken by "many
reformed Churches beyond the seas," neither does he oppose it. Thus, while it may be
true that other commissioners, and perhaps the Scots in particular, influenced the
Assembly to recognize irremediable desertion as a ground for divorce, Gouge did not
necessarily change his mind. Even if he had no private inclination to the position, he
could have been in the minority when the report was drawn up and may well have
acquiesced for the sake of peace. Surely granted the tone of his discussion this would
not have been difficult.

But Gouge is also important in that his position indicates the state of the
question as it was then discussed. It was not a matter of how expansively "desertion"

<a id="ga20-p628"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=630 printed_page=628 -->

should be interpreted, but rather if the person deserted could be considered divorced and thus free to remarry. Gouge was among those inclined, in harmony with English law, to think not.

Two further early seventeenth English divines help to clarify and delineate the state of the discussion at the time of the Westminster Assembly. Andrew Willet, in his massive Synopsis Papismi, that is, A Generall View of Papistrie (5th edition, London, 1634), devotes thirty-five large folio pages to the question of divorce. He recognizes "another cause whereby the marriage knot may bee dissolved, though not for fornication: as when one of the parties doth wilfully renounce, leave and forsake the other person upon no just cause, but either of lightness or for divers religion, as when an Infidell forsaketh a Christian;... Citing the plain words of the Apostle in 1 Cor. 7:15, Willett says that the innocent Christian brother or sister "is freed from the yoke or bond of marriage." (pp. 778-9)

He goes on to describe the desertion "that causeth a dissolution of a marriage" as first being "malitiosa desertio, a malicious departure without any just cause;" second, "the innocent partie must use all meanes to reconcile, reclaim, and bring home againe the wilfull and obstinate partie so departing, if possible;" and third, "if hee continue in his obstinacie, and depart, having no purpose to returne, the matter must be brought before the Judge or Magistrate in such cases: who after publike citation of the obstinate partie, and certaine knowledge that hee refuseth wilfully to appeare being cited, and is not otherwise letted to come, may with mature deliberation pronounce the innocent partie free and at libertie to marrie, according to S. Pauls rule, ..." (p. 779) In the whole of his discussion, Willet does not so much as mention the possibility of physical cruelty as grounds for desertion or divorce.

Another extended discussion of divorce is found in Richard Ward's Theologicall Questions, Dogmaticall Observations, And Evangelicall Essays, Upon...Matthew (London, 1640). Commenting on Matthew 5: 31-2, Ward says that adultery is cause for a "cleane dissolution of marriage by way of divorce:...for that cause our Saviour hath granted liberty, both to dissolve matrimonie, and to marry againe." (pp. 230-1) Of 1 Cor. 7:10-1, in answer to the Roman Catholic objection that "it is not lawful after divorce, to marry so long as both parties live," he says "The Apostle speaks not there of a lawfull departure or separation, to wit, by reason of fornication and adultery (for then he should diametrically have opposed his Master Christ saying here, for adultery there may be a divorce, and departure; Paul there, I command, ne discedat, let not the wife depart from her husband) but of a separation for Religions sake, or for afflictions, or for the cares of those times." (p. 231) In this he does not even appear to recognize a divorce for desertion, much less does he address the issue of physical cruelty.

George Petter in his massive commentary on Mark (A Learned, Pious, and Practical Commentary Upon...Mark. London, 1661) is somewhere between the positions taken by Perkins and Goude. He interprets 1 Cor. 7:15 to mean a "case of malicious and willfull desertion; when one of the married couple, being an unbeliever, that is, a Pagan, or Gentile, and the other a Believer, being after marriage converted to the Christian Religion; the unbeliever doth forsake the believer by departing from him or her, and obstinately refusing to dwell or live with the party forsaken, and that out of a

<a id="ga20-p629"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=631 printed_page=629 -->

hatred of the true Christian Religion: in this case, the Apostle showeth, that the Believer
is not in subjection, but at liberty to marry with another." (pp. 715-6) Beyond this very
narrow ground he says (repeatedly) that "No sin but this of adultery, can, or doth
dissolve the marriage bond." (p. 710)

None of the divines discussed above, from Perkins on, gives the least ground for
thinking that the Westminster Assembly divines intended to include physical cruelty,
whether immediately considered and of itself or secondarily as forcing the other to flee,
as something which would constitute grounds for divorce. None gives any indication
that the temporary separation (which only some spoke of as following such abuse), the
case of religious persecution excepted, could lead to divorce. And most do not even
mention this as a possibility.

Richard Baxter, in his great work on cases of conscience, A Christian Directory:
or, a sum m of practical Theologie, and cases of conscience (2nd edition, London,
1678), is in essential harmony with his predecessors. Fully accepting divorce in the
case of adultery, Baxter considers the question, "Doth not the desertion of one party,
disoblige the other?" He begins his answer by considering which of the two is the
deserting party, it being sometimes hard to discern. He declines absolutely to determine
if a wife should follow her husband from a place where "Gods publick Ordinances" are
rightly administered to go among "ignorant, prophane, heretical persons, or Infidels"
where they are not, there being so many considerations to take into account and the
inconveniences being great whatever way is taken. ('Cases of Divorce", p. 55; II, 9, Q.
15)

He also considers such questions as departure in the cases of attempted murder
and fixed hatred. In the case of "a man or wife know[ing] that the other in hatred doth
really intend by poyson or other murder, to take away their life," he answers that "in
plain danger... it may be done and ought." But in the case of a "fixed hatred" he
concludes that even so wicked a heart as can not be brought to do its duty to love the
other is capable of cure and that "if hatred proceed not to adultery, or murder, or
intolerable injuries, you must remember that Marriage is not a Contract for years but for
life...." He concludes that "therefore you must do your duty, and wait, and pray, and
strive by Love and Goodness to recover Love, and then stay to see what God will do;
For mistakes in your choice [in marriage] will not warrant a separation." (p.56)

He continues:
Quest. 18. what if a woman have a husband that will not suffer her to
read the Scriptures, nor togo to God's Worship publick or private, or
that so beateth or abuseth her, as that it cannot be expected that humane
nature should be in such a case kept fit for any holy action: or if a man
have a Wife that will scold at him when he is praying or instructing his
family, and make it impossible to him to serve God with freedom, or
peace and comfort?

Answ. The Woman must (at necessary seasons, though not when she
would) both read the Scriptures, and Worship God, and suffer patiently
what is inflicted on her: Martyrdome may be as comfortably suffered

<a id="ga20-p630"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=632 printed_page=630 -->

from a Husband, as from a Prince. But yet if neither her own Love, and
duty, and patience, nor friends perswasion, nor the Magistrates justice,
can free her from such inhumane cruelty, as quite disableth her for her
duty to God and man, i see not but that she may depart from such a
Tyrant. But the man hath more means to restrain his Wife from beating
him, or doing such intolerable things: Either by the Magistrate, or by
denying her what else she might have, or by his own violent restraining
her, as belong e th to a conjugal Ruler, and as circumstances shall direct a
prudent man. But yet in case that unsuitableness or sin be so great, that
after long tryal, there is no likelihood of any other co-habitation, but
what will tend to their spiritual hurt and calamity, it is their lesser sin to
live asunder by mutual consent, (p. 56)

He concludes by answering the question, "Who be they that may or may not
marry again when they are parted?," first by allowing those released by adultery to
remarry and then by considering the rest:

The case of all the rest is harder. They that part by consent, to avoid
mutual hurt, may not marry again; Nor the party that departeth for self-
preservation, or for the preservation of estate, or children, or comforts, or
for liberty of Worship, as aforesaid: Because it is but an intermission of
Conjugal fruition, and not a total dissolution of the Relation: And the
innocent party must wait to see whether there be any hope of a return.

he recognizes a difficulty in this: "A short desertion must be endured in hope:
But in the case of a very long, or total desertion or rejection, if the injured party should
have an untameable lust, the case is difficult.... I dare not say that Marriage in that case
is unlawful to the innocent." (p. 56) Baxter does not say to whom he means to apply
this and it is not clear if he intends it liberally of very long and total desertions and
rejections or if he intends it to apply to those he has just said may not marry again. In
any case Baxter is sui generis and ultimately his views can not be taken as
representative of anyone but himself.

The Committee's report makes reference to sixteenth and seventeenth century
Continental Reformed theology. While it is apparent that in the early sixteenth century
both in Zurich and Basel a variety of grounds for divorce were recognized as valid,
including not only adultery and desertion, but disease, life-threatening incompatibility,
impotence, and the like, — and while influential Reformers such as Martin Bucer and
Heinrich Bullinger can readily be quoted to that effect —, there is no evidence that such
views had any lasting influence, particularly in England and Scotland. Although they
represent an attempt to address a real problem, one which needed a solution other than
the recently abandoned Roman Catholic teaching, after mature consideration the
Reformed community as a whole rejected their thinking. It is to Geneva that we should
rather look if we are to seek the historical roots of the views expressed in the
Westminster Confession of Faith. John Calvin's views are well-known and need no
exposition here, allowing only adultery and desertion as grounds of divorce, and
expressly permitting a Protestant wife to flee for safety only if in actual danger of her
life and not simply for cruel beatings. Theodore Beza followed Calvin in this and such

<a id="ga20-p631"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=633 printed_page=631 -->

views, fully compatible with Lutheran doctrine, became normative in Reformed
thought.

In defining desertion as it is ground for divorce, Continental Reformed divines
came to speak of a malitiosa desertio (see Willet's use of the term above), a desertion
which is either a deliberate and permanent removal from the marriage union (such as
the magistrate cannot rectify) or a forced removal caused by such cruelty as puts the
partner's life at hazzard. This was particularly spoken of in the context of the spouse
tenaciously adhering to Romanism; in the case of the husband this often meant physical
prohibition of the wife's exercise of her faith in public or private, such as led to Calvin's
advice mentioned above. In the case of the wife, Roman Catholic persecution being
what it was, it meant a refusal to accompany her husband to a place where he could
worship without fear of the Inquisition. In such cases they believed that the worship of
God took priority over marriage vows and, when there was obstinate continued refusal
by the marriage partner to continue the marital union in circumstances which allowed
the other the exercise of the true religion, they believed divorce justified, though only
after a considerable period of time and as a last resort. They did not, however, consider
simple physical cruelty cause of any more than temporary separation. (See, for
example, Samuel Maresius, Collegium Theologicum, sive Systema Breve LJniversae
Theologiae, Groningae, 1659, p 230, as quoted in the General Assembly Committee's
report; see also the more extended discussions in Frideric Spanheim, Dubiorum
Evangelicorum Pars Tertia, Genevae, 1639, pp. 603-614 and 886-976 and Gisbertus
Voetius, Politicae Ecclesiasticae, partis primae, Libri duo Posteriores, Amsterdam,
1666, pp. 170-215.)

English and Scottish divines, not having the practical pressure of living on the
continent in close proximity to Roman Catholic countries, often felt no need to address
this question. The assumption apparently was that any physical cruelty or danger was
not in a religious context and could therefore be addressed by the proper exercise of
discipline, both ecclesiastical and civil. Although they recognized that temporary
separation might be necessary while the discipline did its work, such separation was not
thought to be anything but temporary (e.g. Perkins, above). It was not considered
preparatory to divorce.

It may be concluded that there is nothing in Puritan thought which would allow
the suggested re-interpretation of the Westminster Confession. The debate then was
between those who would allow divorce for irremediable physical abandonment and
those who would not. None prior to the Westminster Assembly so much as hints at
interpreting desertion in such a way as to include physical abuse —or other violations of
the marriage contract — as grounds for more than a temporary separation.

II. Biblical

Although for reasons of space and the relative familiarity of most with the
Scriptural data particular attention will not be given to the exegetical considerations, it
should be recognized that the Committee’s recommendations are opposed to all but a
few, contemporary, revisionist interpreters. This is quite evident from careful reading of
the Committee's report. And its conclusions in regard to desertion are based on an

<a id="ga20-p632"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=634 printed_page=632 -->

extension of 1 Cor. 7:12-5, recommending careful examination of intent to see if the
spouse judged to be unbelieving has deserted the marriage (pp. 2344-6). This the
Westminster divines almost certainly would have characterized as studying "arguments
unduly to put asunder those whom God hath joined together in marriage."

IB. Practical

it should be observed that virtually no one holds that a believer must remain ina
situation which is genuinely life-threatening; but any such separation, of however
indefinite duration, must be viewed as temporary and never as a step toward divorce. In
such a situation, as Perkins said, the innocent party must conclude that God has called
him or her to a single life.

The Committee has recommended that the General Assembly receive its report
"as a reliable summary of the Historical and Biblical Data and as drawing from that data
valid conclusions" and to adopt its conclusion "That under extreme circumstances, a
Session may properly judge that such desertion (separation) has occurred, even though
the offending spouse is still physically present in the home" and that the believer is then
free to sue for legal divorce, (pp. 2382-3) If the church endorses such a report, it will
not only have affirmed that which is historically erroneous, but will have abandoned,
both in principle and practice, the historic position of the Christian church.

<a id="ga20-p633"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=635 printed_page=633 -->
