<!-- markdown/ga05_1977.md:5104-5118 -->
4. That Gustin No. 11 from the Presbytery of North Georgia concerning homosexuality
be answered by the Assembly in the affirmative, and adopted as amended, as follows:

Whereas, God has plainly spoken of homosexuality in his Word, denouncing both the act and the
desire as sin, condemning this perversion as unnatural, a degrading passion, an indecent act, an error, an abomination and hence worthy of death (Lev. 18:22, Rom. 1:26-32); and

Whereas we recognize, that God’s righteous judgment is upon those who approve of such detestable acts, as well as those who practice them; and

Moreover, whereas God has clearly stated that the condoning of homosexuals along with murderers, immoral men, kidnappers, liars, perjurers and all other unrighteousness is contrary to
sound teaching (1 Tim. 1:1-11, 2 Pet. 3:14-18);

Therefore, be it resolved that the General Assembly encourage Christians to recognize their
responsibility to petition the powers that be that such men and women who practice, approve, or
condone any of these activities not be invested with the authority to teach in schools or be in a
position where they can influence our nation, which professes “In God we trust”.

<!-- markdown/ga05_1977.md:5150-5160 -->
8. The Assembly answered Resolution No. 7 from the Rev. Fred Carr in the affirmative, by adopting it as amended as follows:

Whereas God's Word teaches in the Old Testament that homosexuality is a sin, labeling it an "abomination" in such passages as Leviticus 18:22 and 20:13, and clearly viewing it as sin in the story of Sodom in Genesis 19:1-11; and

Whereas the New Testament reaffirms the sinfulness of this "unnatural" practice in such passages as Romans 1:26, 27 and Jude 7, even stating in I Corinthians 6:9-11 that homosexuals will not inherit the kingdom of heaven;

Therefore, be it resolved that the Fifth General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America affirm the Biblical position for our denomination which states that:

1. The act of homosexuality is a sin according to God's Word;
2. Churches should actively seek to lead the homosexual person to confession and repentance that he might find justification and sanctification in Jesus Christ, according to I Corinthians 6:11; and
3. In light of the Biblical view of its sinfulness, a practicing homosexual continuing in this sin would not be a fit candidate for ordination or membership in the Presbyterian Church in America.
