PDF text extraction artifact for 3-367.pdf
Title: Conflict of Interest in the Presbyterian Church in America
Extraction date: 2026-07-14
Extraction method: PCA Historical Center PDF text view verified against local GA minutes slice

--- range 1: 21st GA (1993), 21-64, III, 7, pp. 174-176 (ga21_1993:9356-9481) ---

given time to present the report of the committee. [See Appendix C,
Attachment 3, p. 308] Adopted
7. That the 21st General Assembly adopt the Conflict of Interest Policy including
the Certificate of Compliance for all the committees and agencies of the General Assembly. Adopted

CONFLICT OF INTEREST
IN THE
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH IN AMERICA
I. BACKGROUND
The Presbyterian Church in America continues to minister and to grow
in an ethically complex society. Faithful stewardship in the leadership of the
church demands high levels of trust in every relationship, and avoidance even of
the appearance of wrongdoing. By direction of the General Assembly and
through the office of the Committee on Administration, an ad hoc committee of
five people was appointed to review the need for the establishment of formal
standards for the guidance of all the church's committees, boards, and
management personnel.

II. DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS
Presbyterian Church in America (PCA). Includes the General Assembly and all formal adjuncts to the General Assembly, its committees (both
permanent and temporary) and boards of agencies, the management personnel of
those entities, and the presbyteries of the church and their related committees.
Included for counsel but not for jurisdiction are the particular churches of the
denomination.
Management Personnel. For the purposes of this document, the term
Management Personnel shall include all members and officers of committees
and boards, together with the management level employees of those committees
and boards.

III. REASONS FOR A POLICY
The Presbyterian Church in America, both as a corporation and as an
ecclesiastical body initiated and sustained by God, has a mandate to conduct all
its affairs decently and in order and in a manner which is above reproach in the
sight of both God and man.

<a id="ga21-p175"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=21 pdf_page=177 printed_page=175 -->

Such accountability includes a commitment to avoid all conflicts of
interest. Such a duty is underscored by Standard 6 of the Evangelical Council
for Financial Accountability, (of which the PCA is a member organization),
which says simply: "Every member organization shall conduct its activities with
the highest standards of financial integrity."
The PCA as a nonprofit tax-exempt ministry depends on charitable
contributions from its members and the Christian public. The maintenance of
that tax-exempt status is important for the church's continued financial stability.
The Internal Revenue Service and state corporate and tax officials view the
operations of the church and its parts as in the nature of a public trust that is
subject to scrutiny by and accountability to both governmental authorities and
members of the public.

IV. PERSONS CONCERNED
Conflict of interest policies of the PCA concern all Management
Personnel and their families, as well as any employees who may influence the
actions or obligate the PCA.

### V. AREAS IN WHICH CONFLICTS MAY ARISE

Conflicts of interest may arise in a broad area of relationships. Included
as examples, but not intended as an exhaustive list:
1) Persons or entities supplying goods and services to the PCA.
2) Persons or entities from whom the PCA leases property and equipment.
3) Persons or entities with whom the PCA deals in connection with the gift,
purchase, or sale of real estate, securities, or other properties.
4) Persons or entities paying honoraria or royalties for products or services
delivered by the PCA or its agents or employees.
5) Other ministries or nonprofit organizations.
6) Donors and others supporting the PCA.
7) Agencies, organizations, or associations which affect theoperations of
the PCA.
8) Family members of PCA Management Personnel or of any of the entities
listed here.

VI. NATURE OF CONFLICTING INTEREST
Conflict of interest exists when any interest, direct or indirect, on the part
of any of the parties listed in the preceding section could reasonably be expected
to exert influence of any kind on or affect the judgment of Management
Personnel of the PCA.

Examples of such conflict of interest include:
1) Owning stock, holding debt, holding office, or other proprietary interests
in any third party dealing with the PCA.
2) Receiving direct or indirect remuneration or benefits for services to the
PCA.
3) Using the PCA's personnel, equipment, supplies, or good will for other
than formally approved activities, programs, and purposes.

<a id="ga21-p176"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=21 pdf_page=178 printed_page=176 -->

4) Receiving personal gifts or loans from third parties dealing with the
PCA.
5) Obtaining interest in real estate, securities, or other property which the
PCA might reasonably be expected to consider buying or leasing.
6) Expending unreasonable staff time during normal business hours for
personal affairs, or for other organizations, to the detriment of work
performance for the PCA.

Such examples are provided only for illustration, and are not intended to
be considered a san exhaustive list.

VII. SCOPE OF THE POLICY
The fact that a relationship as described in this document exists does not
mean that a conflict of interest necessarily exists, or that a conflict, if it does
exist, is of such material importance that it is adverse to the interests of the PCA
or its supporting public.
The essence of the policy governing conflict of interest in the PCA is
that the existence of any of the interests described in this document shall be
disclosed before any transaction is consummated. It shall be the continuing
responsibility of all Management Personnel of the PCA to scrutinize all
transactions for the potential of such conflict of interest, and immediately to
make written disclosure concerning that conflict to the chairman of that body,
or, if the chairman is involved in the conflict, to the vice chairman or other
appropriate officer.

V in. A RESOLUTION
The PCA direct for adoption by all its entities the following standards:
1) Any possible conflict of interest, either previously existing or potential,
on the part of any Management Personnel, affecting activities, property,
funds, services, or employees shall be fully and promptly disclosed in
writing to the chairman of that body, or, if the chairman is involved in
the conflict, to the vice chairman or other appropriate officer.
2) Any Management Personnel having possible conflict of interest on any
matter should refrain from deliberating or voting on all actions relating
to that matter. Where the by-laws of any body within the PCA require
the establishment of a quorum prior to the conducting of business, those

--- range 2: 21st GA (1993), Appendix B duplicate, pp. 293-296 (ga21_1993:16978-17266) ---

given time to present the report of the committee.

7. That the 21st General Assembly adopt the Conflict of Interest Policy including
the Certificate of Compliance for all the committees and agencies of the General Assembly.

8. That in response to the 20th General Assembly instructions that the
Administrative Committee study the appropriatenes of committees, boards of
agencies, or employees thereof being involved in outside commercial interests
promoting or soliciting funds for benefit plans in competition with
denominationally authorized plans, that the 21st General Assembly recommend
that full consideration and application of the principles included in the Conflict
of Interest Report, Section VI:3, be observed by all committees, boards of
agencies and employees thereof.

9. That the 21st General Assembly express its heartfelt appreciation for the
Administrative Committee staff in Atlanta and at the PCA Historical Center in
St. Louis, and that Dr. Paul R. Gilchrist be commended for his good work as
Stated Clerk and be elected for another year of service.

<a id="ga21-p302"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=21 pdf_page=304 printed_page=302 -->

10. That the 21st General Assembly approve Robins, Eskew and Farmer, PC as
auditors for the Administrative Committee, Christian Education and
Publications and Mission to North America for the calendar year ending
December 31,1993.

11. That the 21st General Assembly approve Capin, Crouse & Co. as auditors for
the Committee on Mission to the World for the calendar year ending December
31,1993.

12. Approve the Administrative Committee proposed 1994 expense budget of
$1,076,888 and ASKINGS budget of $855,038.

13. Approve the PCA Office Building proposed 1994 expense budget of $605,900.

14. Approve the Christian Education and Publications Committee proposed 1994
expense budgetof $2,012,970 and ASKINGS budget of $1,256,970.

15. Approve the Covenant College proposed 1994 expense budgetof $10,730,442
and ASKINGS budget of $1,300,000.

16. Approve the Covenant Theological Seminary proposed 1994 expense budget of
$3,912,900 and ASKINGS budget of $1,500,000.

17. Approve the PCA Foundation proposed 1994 expense budget of $421,500.

18. Approve the Insurance, Annuities and Relief proposed 1994 expense budget of
$653,500.

19. Approve the Investor's Fund for Building Development proposed 1994 expense
budget of $367,184 and income of $375,000.

20. Approve the Mission to North America Committee proposed 1994 expense
budget of $3,579,996, income of $3,580,000 with a growth budget of
$1,458,000 and ASKINGS budget of $3,180,000.

21. Approve the Mission to the World Committee proposed 1994 expense budget of
$18,465,992, income of $18,585,000 and ASKINGS budget of $17,960,000.

22. Approve the MTW/Impact proposed 1994 expense budget of $2,821,811.

23. Approve the Ridge Haven proposed 1994 expense budget of $547,900 and
ASKINGS budget of $547,900.

Respectfully submitted,

/s/ William J. Bonner, Chairman

<a id="ga21-p303"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=21 pdf_page=305 printed_page=303 -->

ATTACHMENT 1

REPORT OF THE PCA HISTORICAL CENTER
TO THE TWENTY-FIRST GENERAL ASSEMBLY
OF THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH IN AMERICA

Purpose: The purpose of the PCA Historical Center is to fulfill the historical
preservation/research needs of the Presbyterian Church in America, its committees and
agencies and the churches of the denomination.

Assessment: The Historical Center continues to conduct an annual assessment and
survey of its operations based on a model developed by the Society of American
Archivists. The most recent assessment indicates that the area of greatest need is for
continued improvement in all areas of outreach - both to the denomination as whole and
to the academic community.

Promotion: The major promotion project for the Historical Center over the past year
has been the development of a video workshop on writing church history. This
workshop was primarily designed to encourage local churches to start writing their
history and to provide suggestions on how to begin such a project. The workshop
includes a short instructional video and a portfolio of handout materials for each viewer.
The workshop was first available at the WIC Conference held in Atlanta in September
1992. Churches and groups wishing to schedule the video workshop can do so by
contacting the Historical Center.

Research: Professional researchers continue to use the records and personal papers
housed in the Historical Center. Dr. Keith Pavlischek, professor at Northern Missouri
State University, visited the Center during the summer of 1992 to gather material for an
article on the influence of the "Presbyterian Journal". In November of 1992, Reverend
David Winecoff used the J. oliver bus well collection as a research source fora paper
on Buswell's view of Van Til's concept of "Common Grace". Additional requests for
information and assistance were regularly received via telephone and mail.

Oral History: The Oral History Program continues to have a high priority in the
operations of the Center. We are constantly looking for people to be interviewed and
individuals willing to record oral histories for the Center. Current efforts continue to
focus on individuals who were members of the Bible Presbyterian Church, missionaries
for the Independent Board for Presbyterian Foreign Missions and leaders in the
establishment of the PCA. Recently completed interviews include sessions with Dr.
John H. Gerstner, Dr. Wilber Wallis and Rev. Todd Allen. The Oral History Program is
not only active in seeking and conducting oral interviews, we are regularly transcribing
those interviews. Mrs. Cindi Millen spends approximately ten hours a week
transcribing oral histories for the Historical Center. Recently transcribed oral
interviews include those with Mary and Presley Edwards (laymen leaders in the

<a id="ga21-p304"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=21 pdf_page=306 printed_page=304 -->

RPCES), Mr. Kenneth Keyes, Dr. John Richards, Dr. Aiken Taylor, Dr. Morton Smith
and Mr. Jack Williamson.

Collections: The Historical Center continues to receive records from denominational
offices and personal papers of church leaders. The most recent accessions include the
personal papers of Rev. Frank Fiol (missionary to India, 1936 - 1980), Minutes of
Children for Christ (1944 -1967) and the records of John Spencer (first secretary for the
Committee on Administration of the PCA).

Staff: The staff of the Historical Center consists of a full time director, two student
workers and three volunteers.

Margaret Stephens, Mrs. A1 (Florence) Graham and Mrs. Robert (LaVeme) Rayburn
are our volunteers. They regularly process our collections and organize our
photographic materials.

Intern Program: The internship program established with Missouri Baptist College has
been in effect for one year. Our first intern, Yael Davis, spent two full semesters
learning the duties of an archivist. During her internship with the Center she organized
and processed several small collections, entered information into the computer data
base, mounted numerous photographs and worked with local church histories. She was
a valuable addition to the staff of the Historical Center. Future interns will allow the
Center to reduce the backlog of unprocessed records as well as establish new programs
to better serve the denomination.

Historical Center Sub-Committee: Members of the Historical Center Sub-Committee
are:
Mr. Scott T. Levy, Chairman Dr. David B. Calhoun
Miss Lannae Graham Mr Edward S. Harris
Dr. Donald J. MacNair Mrs. Paul (Georgia) Settle

Dr. Paul Gilchrist and Mr. Ross Cook are ex-officio members of this
committee.

Future Projects

Microfilming: The Historical Center has numerous documents and publications that are
over one hundred years old. Some of these items are in reasonably good condition.
Others are extremely fragile and will begin to crumble if handled extensively. The best
method of preserving the information they contain is by microfilming. The Historical
Center has developed a three pronged approach to protect our older documents. The
first approach is a joint microfilming effort through cooperative agreements with other
institutions. The initial project in this approach was an arrangement between the PCA
Historical Center, the Library of Covenant Theological Seminary and the PC(USA)
department of History in Philadelphia to microfilm back issues of the Christian Sentinel
(1891 - 1901). The Center will continue to pursue additional joint projects with
institutions that have a concern for preserving Presbyterian records/history. A second
approach to microfilming will be the preparation of grant proposals to individual and

<a id="ga21-p305"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=21 pdf_page=307 printed_page=305 -->

corporate foundations. While this approach will be time consuming, if successful, it
will save the expenditure of denominational funds. The third approach will be to
microfilm essential records over a period of several years using a limited amount of
funds from the annual operating budget of the historical Center. The overall strategy of
the Historical Center will be to use all three approaches, with the idea of limiting the
amount of denominational funds allocated to preservation microfilming.

Denominational History: A second major project for the Historical Center will be the
preparation and publication of a booklet/book on the history of the denomination.
Current planning calls for the publication to contain a brief outline history of key events
leading to the founding of the PCA and excerpts from many of our recently transcribed
oral histories. This publication will be designed to assist seminary students in the
preparation for their licensure/ordination exams and as a guide for teaching new church
members about the events surrounding the formation of the PCA.

/s/ Jerry Komegay
Director

<a id="ga21-p306"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=21 pdf_page=308 printed_page=306 -->

ATTACHMENT 2

REPORT OF THE CHAIRMAN OF
THE CAPITAL BUILDING FUND SUBCOMMITTEE
MARCH 1993

We have completed five full years in the PCA Office Building now, during
which time we have had an occupancy rate exceeding 90% while the average vacancy
rate for commercial office buildings in Atlanta has hovered around 20%. A high
occupancy rate, coupled with rental rates at the local market level and modest fund
raising, has enabled us to reduce the debt load to a manageable level.

The year-end financial reports for 1992 show that while we received $120,000
in contributions from churches and individuals, we finished the year with a $128,000
operating surplus. During this same period the mortgage was reduced from $2,147,000
to $1,967,000 - a reduction of $180,000.

On August 4,1992 the Committee met at the AC offices and decided that, since
the original pledges were nearly complete, another effort to raise funds for the building
was needed. The campaign consisted of sending letters to a select group of 330
churches requesting names of contacts within their church whom we could solicit for
the Capital Building Fund. The letters to the churches arrived the same week as
Hurricane Andrew hit Florida so the campaign was immediately called off. We will
discuss renewal of a fund-raising effort in our scheduled conference call meeting in
May.

As the financial reports show, we can probably meet all financial obligations
now without the help of contributions, but that requires that we maintain the same level
of occupancy we have enjoyed. It would also mean that it will take another 10 years to
pay off the present mortgage, during which time we would pay out another $1,000,000
in interest.

The financial results for 1992, the budget for 1993, and the proposed budget for
1994, show cause for concern about the necessity of maintaining a high occupancy
level. Requests by some PCA tenants to have their lease agreement allow them to move
out without prior General Assembly approval give us cause for concern. Although we
can find no clear dictate from the General Assembly that all PCA entities in Atlanta
must be located in the PCA Office Building, we believe that was the expectation and
intent of the Assembly in its unanimous approval of the building purchase at the 15th
General Assembly.

<a id="ga21-p307"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=21 pdf_page=309 printed_page=307 -->

Therefore, in our February 26 conference call meeting we passed the following
motion:

"That the Capital Building Fund Committee recommend to the
Administrative Committee that they recommend that General Assembly
adopt as policy that no committee or agency may move from the PCA
Office Building without prior approval of the General Assembly, or the
Board of Directors of the PCA when the situation requires action before
the GA meets.”

Respectfully submitted,

/s/ Loyd Strickland, Chairman

<a id="ga21-p308"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=21 pdf_page=310 printed_page=308 -->

ATTACHMENT 3

REPORT OF THE SUBCOMMITTEE
ON
CONFLICT OF INTEREST

The subcommittee on Conflict of Interest met three times to fulfill the
Administrative Committee's and the General Assembly's assignments. It met by
telephone conference on September 1, in actual committee on November 19, and again
by telephone conference on February 1.

(1) in response to the request that a subcommittee be appointed to review a proposal
concerning conflict of interest and to recommend a policy to the Administrative
Committee for adoption by the General Assembly, we submit the attached
policy statement and recommend its adoption.

(2) In response to the General Assembly's instruction that the Administrative
Committee study the appropriateness of committees, boards of agencies, or
employees thereof being involved in outside commercial interests promoting or
soliciting funds for benefit plans in competition with denominationally
authorized plans:

This committee urges the careful consideration and application of the
principles included in the attached statement, and especially of Section
VI:3, by all committees, boards of agencies, and employees thereof.

The Subcommittee was composed of:
RE Joel Belz, Chairman
RE Jean Owens
RE Ralph Paden
RE Kenneth Ryskamp

The Administrative Committee received their report and adopted the
recommendations as amended above.

