PDF text extraction artifact for creation/report.pdf
Title: Report of the Creation Study Committee
Extraction date: 2026-07-14
Extraction method: PCA Historical Center PDF text view verified against local GA minutes slice

--- range 1: 28th GA (2000), Report of the Creation Study Committee, pp. 119-212 (ga28_2000:5626-8112) ---

## Report of the Creation Study Committee
### Table of Contents

I. Introductory Statement ... 122
II. Background to the Current Discussion of the Creation Days ... 123
III. Brief Definitions ... 135
IV. Description of the Main Interpretations of Genesis 1-3 and the Creation Days ... 140

A. The Calendar Day Interpretation ... 140
B. The Day-Age Interpretation ... 152
C. The Framework Interpretation ... 162
D. The Analogical Days Interpretation ... 169
E. Other Interpretations of the Creation Days ... 174

V. Original Intent of the Westminster Assembly ... 176
VI. Advice and Counsel of the Committee ... 182

A. Proposal for Reporting to the 28th General Assembly ... 184
B. Recommendations ... 184

VII. Appendices ... 185

A. Definitions (fuller version) ... 185
B. The New Testament’s View of the Historicity of Genesis 1-3 ... 200
C. General Revelation ... 204

## REPORT OF THE CREATION STUDY COMMITTEE

### I. Introductory Statement

We thank our God for the blessings of the last two years. We have profited personally and together by the study of God’s Word, discussion and hard work together.

We have found a profound unity among ourselves on the issues of vital importance to our Reformed testimony. We believe that the Scriptures, and hence

<a id="ga28-p123"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=125 printed_page=123 -->

Genesis 1-3, are the inerrant word of God. We affirm that Genesis 1-3 is a coherent account from the hand of Moses. We believe that history, not myth, is the proper category for describing these chapters; and furthermore that their history is true. In these chapters we find the record of God's creation of the heavens and the earth ex nihilo, of the special creation of Adam and Eve as actual human beings, the parents of all humanity (hence they are not the products of evolution from lower forms of life). We further find the account of an historical fall, that brought all humanity into an estate of sin and misery, and of God's sure promise of a Redeemer. Because the Bible is the word of the Creator and Governor of all there is, it is right for us to find it speaking authoritatively to matters studied by historical and scientific research. We also believe that acceptance of, say, non-geocentric astronomy is consistent with full submission to Biblical authority. We recognize that a naturalistic worldview and true Christian faith are impossible to reconcile, and gladly take our stand with Biblical supernaturalism.

The Committee has been unable to come to unanimity over the nature and duration of the creation days. Nevertheless, our goal has been to enhance the unity, integrity, faithfulness and proclamation of the Church. Therefore we are presenting a unanimous report with the understanding that the members hold to different exegetical viewpoints. As to the rest we are at one. It is our hope and prayer that the Church at large can join us in a principled, Biblical recognition of both the unity and diversity we have regarding this doctrine, and that all are seeking properly to understand biblical revelation. It is our earnest desire not to see our beloved church divide over this issue.

## II. Background to the Current Discussion of the Creation Days

The debate over the nature of the creation days is, theologically speaking, a humble one. It cannot rank with the significant theological debates of our time (within Protestant and evangelical circles) such as whether there can be such a thing as legitimate, biblical Systematic Theology, whether human language is capable of conveying absolute truth, whether truth is propositional, what ought to be the church’s doctrine of scripture, can the church’s traditional doctrine of divine impassibility be biblically sustained, is it time to jettison the historic Christian formulation of the doctrine of God, does the church need to modify its commitment to the Reformation doctrine of justification by faith, and more.

Nevertheless, behind this matter of the Genesis days, and connected with it, are issues of some significance to the Bible-believing Christian community. Most obviously, the discussion of the nature of the creation days is a part of what has been one of the most important sustained theological issues in the Western world over the last century or so: the resolution of the conflicting truth claims of historic Christianity and modern secularism which uses a naturalistic view of evolution as its prop. The doctrine of creation undergirds all truth. Creation and providence are a constant revelation of God, rendering all men inexcusable before him. The issues among us are more specific than the doctrine of creation as such. Among the vast number of biblical

<a id="ga28-p124"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=126 printed_page=124 -->

texts about creation, we are primarily discussing the exegesis of Genesis 1. For these reasons a sane and restrained discussion of the creation days is warranted, and may prove to be helpful to the whole Christian community as we seek to “take every thought captive” and make ourselves ready to “give an apologia for the hope that is in us.”

In this light, it seems wise to offer an historical assessment of the church’s views on the creation days, in order to provide a helpful framework for the current debate. We do not appeal to this history as finally authoritative; the Bible alone must have the final word. But a recounting of history may provide for us some helpful boundaries in this debate and give us a sense of what the best theological minds of the ages have done with this issue.

In the fourteen centuries prior to the Westminster Assembly numerous commentaries on the days of creation in Genesis 1-2 were produced. Frank Egleston Robbins in his *The Hexaemeral Literature: A Study of the Greek and Latin Commentaries on Genesis* (Chicago: U. of Chicago Press, 1912) lists more than 130 authors of works on the six days of creation from Origen in the 3rd century to John Milton in the 17th century.¹ Robert Letham in his more recent article “‘In the Space of Six Days’: The Days of Creation from Origen to the Westminster Assembly,” *Westminster Theological Journal* 61:2 (Fall 1999), adds several more to the list, including many whose writings the Westminster Divines would have known.

Out of all of this literature it is possible to distinguish two general schools of thought on the nature of the six days. One class of interpreters tends to interpret the days figuratively or allegorically (e.g., Origen and Augustine), while another class interprets the days as normal calendar days (e.g., Basil, Ambrose, Bede and Calvin). From the early church, however, the views of Origen, Basil, Augustine and Bede seem to have had the greatest influence on later thinking. While they vary in their interpretation of the days, all recognize the difficulty presented by the creation of the sun on the fourth day.

Origen (c. 185-254), in answering Celsus’ complaint that Genesis has some days before the creation of the sun, moon, and stars, and some days after, replies that Genesis 2:4 refers to “the day in which God made the heaven and the earth” and that God can have days without the sun providing the light (*Contra Celsum*, VI: 50-51). Referring to his earlier Commentary on Genesis (now lost), Origen says, “In what we said earlier we criticized those who follow the superficial interpretation and say that the creation of the world happened during a period of time six days long...” (*Contra Celsum*, VI: 60). In his *De Principiis* IV, 3, 1 he says, “What person of any intelligence would think that there existed a first, second, and third day, and evening and morning, without sun, moon, and stars?”²

¹ An annotated “Index of Names” appears on pages 93-104.

² See Origen: “*Contra Celsum*”, translated with an introduction and notes by Henry Chadwick (Cambridge: at the University Press, 1965), 367, 375-376, and note 1.

<a id="ga28-p125"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=127 printed_page=125 -->

Basil (330-379) opposes the allegorical tendencies o for i gen and takes a more
straightforward approach to the days of creation He regards them as 24-hour days, but
he acknowledges the problem of the sun being created on lyon the fourth day his
solution: “Before the luminaries were created as its vehicles the light caused day and
night by being drawn back and sent forth /'3 This explanation drew some criticism, with
the result that Basil’s brother, gregory of Nyssa, later wrote a treatise defending his
brother against those critics “who alleged obscurity in the explanation of the making of
the light and the later creation of the luminaries ”4

Although Ambrose (c 339-397) largely followed Basil’s treatment of the six
days as 24-hour days, Augustine (354-430) found Basil’s explanation of the light and
darkness on the first three days before the creation of the sun too difficult to accept It
is partly forth is reason that augustine says in the city of cod XI, 6, “What kind of
days these were it is extremely difficult, or perhaps impossible for us to conceive ”
Puzzled as to when God created time, with the sun (by which our normal days are
measured) created only on the fourth day, Augustine opted for instantaneous creation,
with the “days” of genesis 1 being treated as six repetitions of a single day or days of
angelic knowledge or some other symbolic representation Augustine’s view, with its
emphasis on instantaneous creation, would have an influence through the Middle Ages
and still be held by some, such as Sir Thomas Browne, at the time of the westminster
Assembly.

With the Venerable Bede (c 673-735) there begins a trend in which
commentators preferred to understand the six days to be real days,
explaining Gen 2:4 by asserting that in the latter passage dies means
“space of time,” not “day,” and that all things were created at once in the
sense that the first heaven an dearth contained the substance of all
things, i.e., matter, which with Augustine they would not admit was
made wholly without form, and which was formed in six days into this
world 5

Bede does hold to 24-hour days, but realizes that an explanation is needed for the
alternation of light and darkness in the first three days before the creation of the sun
He says that “the light was divided so as to shine in the upper and not the lower parts of
the earth, and that it passed under the earth, making a day of twenty-four hours with
morning and evening, precisely a st hes undoes 1,6 In the western or Latin church some
commentators, such as John Scotus Erigena, followed Augustine’s views, but most
followed Bede’s approach, sometimes combining various elements from both views as

3F.E Robbins. Hexaemeral Literature, 49
bobbins. 54
'Robbins. 78-79.
’’Robbins. 80

<a id="ga28-p126"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=128 printed_page=126 -->

in the case of Robert Grossteste (c. 1168-1253), who also emphasized the literary structure of Genesis 1 with three days of ordering and three days of parallel adornment.⁹

On the question of the nature of the light before the creation of the sun, the Greek church, following Basil, tended to have a different explanation from the Latin church:

One school, which Bonaventure [13ᵗʰ century] ... had suggested was that of the Greeks rather than the Latins, maintained that light originally came into the world in an ebb-and-flow-like manner. Day was made when light flowed into the world, night, when the light was drawn back. The more common opinion of the Latins was that the first light, when it came into being, had diurnal or twenty-four-hour rotation; it moved around the universe in twenty-four hours, just as the sun will when it comes into being three days hence.¹⁰

Although the first three days might be 24-hour days, in either view they were not solar days. The eastern or Greek church also entertained a variety of views on the days of creation. Theodore of Mopsuestia, Diodore of Tarsus, and Theodoret teaching more fanciful versions than that of Basil.¹¹

In the 16ᵗʰ century the Protestant Reformers mainly wanted to distance themselves from fanciful allegorizations of the days of creation—which is how they regarded Augustine’s solution to the problem of the nature of the days. Martin Luther acknowledged some of the difficulties in Genesis 1, alluding to Jerome’s comment that the Rabbis prohibited anyone under thirty from expounding this chapter, but he clearly held to six 24-hour days.¹² The issue of the sun being created on the fourth day lingered in the interpretation of the Reformers and Puritans. John Calvin in his Commentary on Genesis 1:14 says of the fourth day:

God had before created the light, but he now institutes a new order in nature, that the sun should be dispenser of diurnal light, and the moon and stars should shine by night. And he assigns them this office, to teach us that all creatures are subject to his will, and execute what he enjoins upon them.¹³

---

⁹See Robert Letham, loc. cit., who also shows how Thomas Aquinas (1225-1274) played down any incompatibility between Augustine’s view and one of sequential order.

⁸Nicholas H. Steneck, Science and Creation in the Middle Ages: Henry of Langenstein (d. 1397) on Genesis (Notre Dame and London: U. of Notre Dame Press, 1976), 54.

⁹Robbins, 57, 61.

¹⁰Martin Luther, Luther’s Works: Volume 1: Lectures on Genesis 1-5, ed. Jaroslav Pelikan (St. Louis: Concordia, 1958), 3-5.

¹¹Commentaries on the First Book of Moses Called Genesis (Grand Rapids: Baker Book House, 1979) 1:83.

<a id="ga28-p127"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=129 printed_page=127 -->

Commenting on the creation of light on the first day in Genesis 1:3, Calvin pursues the same theme of God’s sovereignty:

It did not, however, happen from inconsideration or by accident, that the light preceded the sun and the moon. To nothing are we more prone than to tie down the power of God to those instruments, the agency of which he employs. The sun and moon supply us with light: and, according to our notions, we so include this power to give light in them, that if they were taken away from the world, it would seem impossible for any light to remain. Therefore the Lord, by the very order of the creation, bears witness that he holds in his hand the light, which he is able to impart to us without the sun and the moon.

Then he goes on to say:

Further, it is certain, from the context, that the light was so created as to be interchanged with darkness. But it may be asked, whether light and darkness succeeded each other in turn through the whole circuit of the world; or whether the darkness occupied one half of the circle, while light shone in the other. There is, however, no doubt that the order of their succession was alternate, but whether it was everywhere day at the same time, and everywhere night also, I would rather leave undecided; nor is it very necessary to be known.

Calvin does not directly address the issue of the exact nature of the days of creation in the 1559 edition of his Institutes but rather, discouraging speculation, refers his readers in a straightforward manner to the text of Genesis and to the help of such earlier commentaries as Basil’s *Hexaemeron* and the *Hexaemeron* of Ambrose.¹² It should be noted that these commentators are explicit in their endorsement of a 24-hour view of the Genesis days.

Calvin, along with the other Reformers, rejected the Augustinian approach to the Genesis days. For Calvin, God did not merely accommodate himself to his people in the way he explained his creative work, God actually accommodated himself in the way he performed his creative work: “it is too violent a cavil to contend that Moses distributes the work which God perfected at once into six days, for the mere purpose of conveying instruction. Let us rather conclude that God himself took the space of six days, for the purpose of accommodating his works to the capacity of men.”¹³

The implication of the sun’s being created on the fourth day apparently was lurking in the mind of the great Puritan theologian of the late Elizabethan period, William Perkins, who wrote in his *Exposition of … the Creede*:

¹²Calvin, *Institutes* I.xiv.20, trans. Ford Lewis Battles, ed. John T. McNeill (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1960).

¹³Calvin, *Commentaries on the First Book of Moses Called Genesis*, 78.

<a id="ga28-p128"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=130 printed_page=128 -->

...some may aske in what space of time did God make the world? I answer, God could have made the world, and all things in it in one moment: but hee beganne and finished the whole worke in sixe distinct daies. In the first day hee made the matter of all things and the light: ... in the fourth day hee made the Sunne, the Moone, and the Starres in heaven: ... and in the ende of the sixth day hee made man. Thus in sixe distinct spaces of time, the Lord did make all things...14

Some have seen in Perkins’ paraphrasing of “six distinct days” with “six distinct spaces of time” an acknowledgment that the nature of at least the first three days may not be clear, while others view him as holding the view of the Genesis days as normal calendar days.

With that background for the Westminster Assembly, whose members were well acquainted with the works of Calvin and of Perkins as well as of William Ames and their respected contemporary Anglican Archbishop of Ireland James Ussher, what are we to make of their incorporation of the phrase “in the space of six days” in *The Confession of Faith* and Catechisms? Clearly the use of “in the space of six days,” and not simply “in six days,” is intended at least to differ with the view of instantaneous creation as advocated by Augustine and those like him. The specific language appears to be picked up from the *Irish Articles* of Ussher, who like Perkins and Ames may have derived the terminology from Calvin.

Brief commentaries on Genesis 1 or on creation have come down to us from only a few of the Westminster Divines. John White, John Ley, John Lightfoot, George Walker, and William Twisse—all prominent members of the Westminster Assembly—held to six 24-hour days of creation.15 Lightfoot and Walker also expressed even more specific views on the days of creation; they wrote that creation must have occurred on the equinox, but Lightfoot claimed on the autumnal equinox, while Walker said on the vernal equinox. Lightfoot also asserted that the first day was 36 hours long and that the fall of Adam and Eve occurred on the sixth day, Adam having been created around 9 a.m. and Eve having been tempted around 12 noon. Such specific speculation was not incorporated into the confessional documents. Nor was the expression “in the space of six 24-hour days,” a specific qualifier that was proposed with regard to the Sabbath, but rejected by the Assembly.16

---

14 William Perkins, *Works*, 3 vols. (London, 1612), I: 143.

15 John White, *Commentary upon the Three First Chapters in Genesis* (1656); John Ley in *Annotations upon All the Books of the Old and New Testaments* (1645, 1651, 1657); John Lightfoot, *Works* (1822), II, 71-74, 333-335, 411-414; IV, 62-66; VII, 372-379; George Walker, *God Made Visible in His Works* (1641), 44-47; William Twisse, *Of the Morality of the Fourth Commandment* (1641), 51.

16 *Minutes of the Sessions of the Westminster Assembly*, ed. Alex F. Mitchell and John Struthers, 1874, reprint by Still Waters Revival Books, Edmonton, Alberta, 1991 B p. 216 for Session 615, April 6, 1646.

<a id="ga28-p129"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=131 printed_page=129 -->

two differing interpretations of the Assembly’s meaning are currently being
articulated by historians of Westminster. One view says that the Assembly shows the
same reticence as calvin and the caution of perkins with his use of “six distinct days” or
“six distinct spaces of time” and that, therefore, the Confession supports an
understanding of the creative days of genesis as representing a real ordered sequence,
over against instantaneous creation, but the question remains whether the phrase “in the
space of six days” is necessarily to be understood as six 24-hour days. The other view
is that the Confession's phrase “in the space of six days” actually means six normal
calendar days. This view grants that the Assembly meant to rule out the Augustinian
instantaneous view, but not merely to do that. Those who hold this position note that
there is no evidence that any member of the assembly held to a view other than the 24-
hour view of the genesis days and that the only primary evidence that we currently
possess from the writings of the divines or from the irish articles indicates that the
phrase was an affirmation of the calendar day view.17

before we move onto review the history of the interpretation of the genesis
days to the present, it seems appropriate to draw some conclusions from the first half of
our study. First, it is apparent that there existed in the church prior to the Reformation
two broad tendencies in the interpretation of the genesis days: one more figurative, the
other more literal— the Calendar Day view. Second, the Calendar Day view was
advocated in both the eastern and western parts of the church (Basil, gregory of Nyssa,
Ambrose and Bede), as was the figurative view (Origen, John Scotus Erigena and
Augustine). Third, the Calendar Day view appears to be the majority view amongst
influential commentators. Certainly, it is the only view held by contemporary Reformed
theologians that is explicitly articulated in early Christianity. Fourth, the issue of the
length of the creation days was apparently not taken up in any ecclesiastical council and
never became apart of any of the early ecumenical creed al statements. Fifth, the
Reformers explicitly rejected the Augustinian figurative or allegorical approach to the
Genesis days on hermeneutical grounds. Sixth, the Westminster Assembly codified this
rejection, following Calvin, Perkins and Ussher, in the Westminster Confession.
Seventh, there is no primary evidence of diversity within the westminster assembly on
the specific issue of whether the creation days are to be interpreted as calendar days or
figurative days. Such primary witnesses as we have either say nothing (the majority) or
else specify that the days are calendar days.

as we look at views of the creation days after Westminster, we find little if any
difference over the matter within the Reformed community until the nineteenth century.
The earliest commentators on the Confession and Catechisms (Watson, Vincent,
Ridgeley, Henry, Fisher, Doolittle, Willison, Boston, Brown and others) affirm “six
days” without the kind of specificity that john light foot provides, reject the
Augustinian view, and generally concentrate more on the assertion of creation ex nihilo.
this suggests that there was no significant diversity on the matter of the nature of the
creation days in the Reformed community between 1650 and 1800. Indeed, it would be

17Note the discussion of the Irish Articles in section V below, “Original Intent of the
Westminster Assembly.”

<a id="ga28-p130"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=132 printed_page=130 -->

1845 before a commentary on the Confession or Catechisms would explicitly discuss
varying views of the genesis days.18

at the turn of the nineteenth century, prior to darwin and in the wake of the new
geology, Reformed Christians began to take a different look at the Genesis days. It was
during this time that the two oldest alternatives to the Calendar Day view were
developed: the Gap Theory and the Day-Age view. The Gap Theory was held by
Thomas Chalmers and for a time by Charles Hodge. It is found in the original Scofield
Bible. The Day-Age view, in varying forms and with varying emphases was adopted by
orthodox reformed divines on both sides of the Atlantic: Charles and A. A. Hodge,
Warfield, Shedd and others in America, Shaw, Miller, James Orr, and Donald
MacDonald in Britain. Kuyper and Bavinck in the Netherlands did not hold to the
Calendar Day view, but are difficult to categorize in our terms. Meanwhile, the
Calendar Day view continued to be articulated alongside these newer views by
significant theologians and educators in Britain and America: Hugh Martin in Scotland,
Ashbel Green, Robert L. Dabney, John L. Girardeau in the United States.

Several things ought to be noted about this transition. First, the propounding of
these newer views apparently did not provoke ecclesiastical sanctions by the various
Presbyterian bodies in which these men held membership. Second, the most famous
nineteenth-century commentators on the Confession (Shaw, Hodge, Beattie and
Warfield) all held day-age views and asserted that the Confession was unspecific on the
matter. Beattie succinctly articulates their view:

it is not necessary to discuss at length the meaning of the term days here
used. The term found in the Standards is precisely that which occurs in
Scripture. Hence, if the word used in Scripture is not inconsistent with
the idea of twenty-four hours, or that of along period of time, the
language of the standards cannot be out of harmony with either idea.
there is little doubt that the framers of the standards meant a literal day
of twenty-four hours, but the caution of the teaching on this point in
simply reproducing scripture is worthy of all praise. The door is open in
the Standards for either interpretation, and the utmost care should be
taken not to shut that door at the bidding of a scientific theory against
either view.19

Third, there were however a number of voices of concern raised by nineteenth century calvinists about these newer views. Ashbel Green, for instance, could say in his
Lectures on the Shorter Catechism (1841):

l!Some diversity is to be found in some figures outside the orthodox Reformed community, such
as the late 17th century Anglicans Thomas Burnet and Isaac Newton and the early 18th century Baptist
William Whiston.
19 Francis R. Beattie, The Presbyterian Standards, (1896, rpt., Greenville, SC: Southern
Presbyterian Press, 1997), 80-81

<a id="ga28-p131"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=133 printed_page=131 -->

some recent attempts have been made to show that the days of creation,
mentioned in the first chapter of Genesis, should be considered not as
days which consist of a single revolution of the earth, but as periods
comprehending several centuries. But all such ideas, however learned or
ingeniously advocated, I cannot but regard as fanciful in the extreme,
and what is worse, as introducing such a method of treating the plain
language of Scripture, as is calculated to destroy all confidence in the
volume of inspiration.

dabney added his own expressions of concern in his lectures on systematic theology
(1871). Fourth, while Hodge, Shaw, Mitchell, Warfield, Samuel Baird and Beattie held
that the Confession is non-committal on the issue of the nature of the creation days,
James Woodrow and Edward Morris (neither of whom held to a calendar day view)
both held that the Confession did teach a Calendar Day view, and Woodrow declared
his view to be an exception to the Confession. Woodrow continued to teach his view
until he became an advocate of theistic evolution— a position which led to his removal
from his teaching post.

in the latter part of the nineteenth-century, there were vigorous theological
discussions about evolution and the Genesis account, but none of them was primarily
focused on the nature of the creation days. general assemblies of the southern
presbyterian church declared theistic evolution to be out of accord with scripture and
the Confession on four occasions (1886, 1888, 1889, 1924).20 This position was
renounced by the PCUS in 1969. Meanwhile, in the Northern Presbyterian church,
most notably old school Princeton,21 there was a greater openness to integration of
dominant biological theories of the day. During the twentieth century, there has
generally been an allowed diversity, if not without controversy, among the various
conservative presbyterian churches on the matter of the creation days. Many Reformed
stalwarts have held to some form of the Day-Age view (Machen, Allis, Buswell, Harris
and Schaeffer among them). Additionally, by the 1960s the Framework view was
growing in popularity in the Reformed community. the following declaration of the
presbytery of central mississippi (PCUS 1970) is representative of some conservative
Presbyterians that founded the PCA:

God performed his creative work in six days. (We recognize different
interpretations of the word “day” and do not feel that one interpretation
is to be insisted upon to the exclusion of all others.)22

20 The substance of this stated position is that Scripture, our Confession of Faith and the
Catechisms teach that man was created body and soul by immediate acts of Almighty Power, without any
natural animal parentage of any kind, out of matter previously created out of nothing. (Digest of Acts and
Proceedings of General Assembly, page 6-8.)
21 This view parallels the Free Church of Scotland
22 Minutes of the Presbytery of Central Mississippi, 1970, 57-58, 81.

<a id="ga28-p132"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=134 printed_page=132 -->

At the same time the Calendar Day view was likely the most widely held view in the
church.

what then accounts for the current state of controversy? There was a diversity
of opinion on the nature of the creation days at the inception of the PCA in 1973, and
when Joining and Receiving was accomplished with the RPCES in 1982 an even greater
diversity existed amongst the teaching eldership, without its being a controversial issue
why then are we now experiencing serious tensions over the issue of the creation days?

That is a difficult question to answer, but we offer the following surmises:

1. First, the four most prominent views of the creation days in the PCA are (in no
particular order) the 24-hour view, the Day-Age view, the Framework view and the
Analogical Day view. the framework view was not widely held at the founding of the
PCA, although it does not seem to have become controversial until recently. The
Analogical Day view in its most recent expression was not circulated broadly until the
1990s. Presbyterians do not like to be surprised and that probably accounts for some of
the unfriendly reactions to these views.

2. Second, the Christian Reconstructionist community has heavily emphasized the
doctrine of creation in general and the 24-hour Day view in particular as a test of
orthodoxy. Their arguments have been widely read and are influential in PCA circles.

3. Third, the home-schooling curricula used by many in the PCA often come from
a young-earth creationist perspective, with its attendant polemic against “non-literal”
views. This has been influential in PCA homes and congregations

4. Fourth, there is a conviction among many that Christians are engaged in
“culture wars” forth every survival of the christian heritage and worldview. Reformed
christians rightly agree that the doctrine of creation lies at the basis of the christian
worldview. Criticisms or questions about the calendar-day exegesis may be perceived
as questioning the doctrine of creation itself. Calendar-day proponents are used to this
coming from outside the church, but not from within and therefore have labeled the
non-Calendar Day proponents as accommodating the secular culture. The mutual
trading of accusations has certainly raised the temperature of the debate

5. Fifth, there have always been men in the PCA who held similar sentiments to
Ashbel Green, Dabney, Girardeau and others, that is, they feared that non-literal
approaches to the genesis days undercut the inspiration and authority of Scripture. As
the semen and their disciples have become aware of the increasing numbers of men in
the PCA who hold non-Calendar day views of the genesis days, they have— not
surprisingly— become more concerned.

6. Sixth, the advent of the “Intelligent Design Movement” has put the matter of the
bible and science back on the front pages of theological discussion. The leadership of

<a id="ga28-p133"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=135 printed_page=133 -->

the Intelligent Design Movement makes it a point to be non-committal on the age of the
earth or the nature of the genesis days. Thus, Calendar Day proponents are taking
pains to reassert their view.

7. Seventh, the proponents of the newer non-Calendar day views of the creation
days (Kline, Futato, Irons, Collins and others) believe that they have significant
hermeneutical insights into Genesis 1 that have not been sufficiently addressed by those
who hold to a Calendar Day view This may be so However, as has been the case with
other issues some of their students and disciples have gone before presbyteries without
sufficient knowledge or humility and sought to criticize the Calendar Day view Thus
these licensure and ordination examinations have provoked adverse reactions. On the
other hand the motives of those holding the non-Calendar Day views have sometimes
been uncharitably judged.

8. Eighth and finally, it is probably fair to say that the PCA is more self
consciously, consistently and thoroughly committed to Reformed theology now than it
was at its inception. The major contributing factor to this is that most PCA ordinands
are now educated in theological seminaries that are explicitly evangelical and Reformed
in apologetic approach, biblical studies, and theology whereas the ministry of the PCA
in the early 1970's had been largely educated in neo-orthodox denominational
institutions where they had to struggle just to keep their evangelical convictions intact.
Hence, there are higher expectations in examinations and more wide-ranging
questioning in presbyteries— including the area of creation rather than being a sign of
theological downgrade, the tension is an indicator of greater theological awareness.

CONCLUSION
a survey of recent PCA history and practice yields the following. First, it has
been assumed in the conservative Reformed community for more than 150 years (on the
strength of the witness of Shaw, Hodge, Mitchell and Warfield) that the Confession
articulates no particular position on the nature and duration of the creation days and that
one’s position on the subject is a matter of indifference. Second, and in that light, many
of the founding fathers of the PCA took their ordination vows in good conscience while
holding to non-literal views of the creation days or while holding to th a tissue as a
matter of indifference. it would be less than charitable for any of us to view them as
unprincipled. Third, recent primary evidence uncovered by David Hall and others has
convinced many that what the Westminster Assembly meant by its phrase “in the space
of six days” was six calendar days. Fourth, one hears from some the complaint that the
PCA has ‘broadened’ and from others that it has ‘narrowed’ in its tolerance of positions
on the days of creation. There is, perhaps, something to be said for both these
perceptions since there appears to be advocacy for change in the PCA in both broader
and narrower directions.

For instance, in light of the discovery and/or interpretation of new historical
evidence regarding the Confession's teaching on creation, some who hold to an

<a id="ga28-p134"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=136 printed_page=134 -->

“exclusive Calendar Day view”23 have been encouraged to press vigorously for the
whole denomination to adhere to that view and that view only. This would be,
irrefutably, a change in the practice of the PCA. But those who hold this view justify
the change on constitutional and biblical grounds. Their argument goes like this: “we
now know that the constitution explicitly expounds a 24-hour day view and thus any
deviation from that is a contradiction of it, no matter what our past practice has been
Furthermore,” they say, “the acceptance of the calendar day view is an indication of
one’s commitment to Scriptural authority.” Hence, when this or like views are
advanced, some rightly perceive a move to bring about a “narrowing change” in the
PCA

On the other hand, others advocate that the PCA now make explicit what they
consider to have been its implicit allowance of latitude on this issue. That is, they
believe that because the PCA has had a limited but broadly practiced implicit latitude on
the matter of the nature and length of the creation days we should now make that
latitude explicit and more uniform and comprehensive. This, too, entails an advocacy
for change. For instance, the only widely held alternative to the Calendar Day view
held at the beginnings of the PCA was the Day-Age view. The Framework view was
not widely embraced or understood by the PCA ministry in 1973, and the Analogical
view of the genesis days, a sit is now promulgated, was unknown. Thus, those who
advocate that we make explicit our implicit latitude intend that we acknowledge as
legitimate and consistent with the Confession views that were either generally unknown
or non-extant at the time of the PCA ’s formation. Furthermore, they do not want
presbyteries to note such views or consider them exceptions or restrict their being
taught. Hence, when this or like views are expressed, some rightly perceive a move to
bring about a “broadening change” in the PCA.

There is a third way to avoid such potentially provocative changes from our
earlier practice in 1973, declining the more extreme wishes of both the exclusive 24-
hour side and the totally inclusivist side. retaining our practice of 1973 would be to
retain the original boundaries of that widely held earlier understanding of the PCA’s
constitution, receiving both the Six Calendar Day and the Day-Age interpretations
without constitutional objection, as was the habit in 1973, but noting that any other
views were different and ought to be considered carefully by the Presbyteries in light of
their historic patterns. this is the only way to both protect the rights of presbyteries to
set the terms of li censure and ordination and at the same time preclude either a
narrowing ora broadening of our historic 1973 practice. It should be acknowledged,
however, that there are presbyteries that do in fact receive men holding other views
without requiring an exception, provided the men can affirm the historic i ty of gen 1-3
and do reject evolution.

23By “exclusive Calendar Day view” we here indicate the position that the only view that should
be allowed to be held, preached and taught in the PCA is the Calendar Day view. We hasten to add that
not all of the Calendar Day proponents in the PCA are exclusive in their position. One might reasonably
surmise that most Calendar Day proponents in the PCA believe in varying degrees of and approaches to
inclusion.

<a id="ga28-p135"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=137 printed_page=135 -->

III. Brief Definitions
the c sc recognizes that definition of terms has been a significant problem in
this particular debate. Often those asking questions and those giving answers have
misunderstood one another because they did not share a common understanding of the
specialized terminology connected with the interpretation of genesis 1-3 and the issue
of origins. we are far from claiming that the debate is only a matter of semantics and
that it would be diffused if we merely clarified our usages. Nevertheless, we
unanimously agree that abetter grasp of the nuances of meanings of certain terms could
greatly help our current discussion of this matter. Thus, the CSC has developed the
following working definitions to help sharpen the denotation and connotation of those
who engage in debate upon these matters.

we here summarize the definitions of key terms in our own discussions: literal,
historical, creationism, evolution, science, and harmonization. We also define some key
linguistic and philosophical terms that clarify some of the issues. For more detailed
treatment of these matters, please see the Appendices.

1. Literal.
• Hermeneutical sense: the meaning the author intended (focuses on communication
from author to original audience). Does not exclude beforehand figurative descriptions,
anthropomorphisms, hyperbole.

• Literalistic sense: take the text in its most physical terms, without allowance for
figures of speech (focuses on surface meaning). This tends to equate surface meaning
with intended meaning.
When we pursue a properly literal interpretation, only the hermeneutical sense of
“literal” has priority for us.

2. Historical.
“A record of something the author wants us to believe actually happened in the
space-time world.”

this does not decide ahead of time such things as whether the manner of
description is free from figurative elements, or whether the account is complete in
detail, or whether things must be narrated in the order in which they occurred (unless
the author himself claims it).

3. Linguistic terms
a. Poetical.
• Popular definition: poetical language does not require an historical referent for its
power.

• Linguistic/literary definition: the focus is on the kind of language and literary
style—there may be rhythm, but especially there will be imaginative descriptions and

<a id="ga28-p136"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=138 printed_page=136 -->

attempts to enable the reader to feel what it was like to be there. does not of itself
oppose “historicity.”

Those who would employ the term “poetical” for the creation account should clarify the
sense in which they are using the term and the conclusions they wish to draw from it.

b. Analogy.
“Similarity in some respects between things otherwise unlike.”
the key to understanding an analogy is therefore discerning the points of similarity and
of difference.

two kinds of analogy that are important for theology are:
• Metaphor: an implicit analogy, that is, we do not find the words “like” or “as” in the
statement, we infer them (e.g. “you are the salt of the earth;” “the tongue is a fire”).

• Anthropomorphism: speaking about God as if he had human form or attributes (e.g.,
“let you rears be attentive and you reyes be open to hear the prayer of your servant”
[Neh 1:6], “in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, and on the seventh day he
ceased from labor and was refreshed” [Exod 31:17]).

we must carefully resist any notion that a statement containing a metaphor or
anthropomorphism is “only a metaphor,” as if this sort of language is unsuited to God,
or as if such figures are contrary to historicity.

4. Philosophical terms.
• Equivocation (technical sense): a fallacy committed if we use words in different
senses without distinction, or if we assume that what is true for one sense is true of the
other senses.

• Equivocation (popular usage): the use of a word ina different sense than the hearer
is likely to understand it, or to be deliberately ambiguous.

• Metaphysics: one’s convictions as to what the world is like, how its parts interact
with one another, and what role God has in it all.

• Naturalism: a metaphysical position that the world exists on its own, and that God
exerts no influence on any object or event in the world.

• Deism: the view that God made the world, but that he no longer involves himself in
its workings.

• Catastrophism: the view that geological phenomena were caused by catastrophic
disturbances of nature, rather than by continuous and uniform processes. “Flood
geology” is a form of catastrophism, which explains many features of the world by the

<a id="ga28-p137"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=139 printed_page=137 -->

catastrophic flood of Noah’s time. Although geological catastrophism is generally
connected with young earth geology, the connection is not a necessary one.

• Uniformitarianism: the view that, since natural laws do not change, the processes
now operating are sufficient to explain the geological history of the earth there are
two forms of uniformitarianism:

• Methodological uniformitarianism: the view that, though the processes have always
been the same, nevertheless their rates and intensities may have varied over the earth’s
history (and therefore the earth’s history may in fact include catastrophic upheavals).
This is a very common position in modern geology. this position of itself does not
deny the possibility of an historical flood inn oah’s day, or of miracles.

• Substantive uniformitarianism: the view that, over the course of the earth’s history,
the intensities and rates of the geological processes have remained the same. This
position, associated with Charles Lyell’s 1830 principles of Geology, is not widely held
by modem geologists

5. Creationism.
• General meaning: affirms that the universe is a creation of God, and hence that a
world-view such as naturalism is untrue.

• Young earth creationism: the belief that the earth and universe are less than about
15,000 years old. this is commonly connected with the calendar day interpretation of
Genesis 1. some adherents of the calendar day view, however, do not take a position
on the age of the earth, and some adherents of the other views do not require that the
earth be “old ”

• Old earth creationism: creationism that allows that the natural sciences accurately
conclude that the universe is “old” (i.e. millions or even billions of years).

Two sub-categories of old-earth creationism:
- theistic evolution: belief that natural processes sustained by God’s ordinary
providence are God’s means of bringing about life and humanity.
- progressive creationism: belief that second causes sustained by God’s
providence are not the whole story, but that instead God has added supernatural,
creative actions to the process, corresponding to the fiats of genesis 1.

Some confusion can arise because progressive creationists vary in the degree of
biological change they are willing to countenance in between the creative events.

The progressive creationists and the young earth creationists agree on a key
point: namely that natural processes and ordinary providence are not adequate to
explain the world. they both fall into the category of supernatural creation is ts or
special creationists.

<a id="ga28-p138"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=140 printed_page=138 -->

6. Evolution.
• Basic meaning: change over time. (Simply a descriptive claim, with no comment on
how the change took place.)

• Biological evolution (neutral sense): genetic change over time. (This makes no
comment on where those changes came from, or on how extensive they can be.)

• Naturalistic evolution (“neo-Darwinism”): “The diversity of life on earth is the
outcome of evolution: an unpredictable and natural process of temporal descent with
genetic modification that is affected by natural selection, chance, historical
contingencies and changing environments” (National association of biology Teachers).
this rules out any supernatural activity of god in the origin and development of life and
of humans, and hence makes a naturalistic meta physic the basis of science.

• Theistic evolution:
- precise sense: God designed a world which has within itself all the capacities
to develop life and its diversity.
- broader senses: some apply the term to all brands of old-earth creationism,
some apply it to versions of old-earth creationism that allow large-scale biological
development (e.g. all mammals share a common ancestor), some apply it to any view
that allows common ancestry for all living things.
- Woodrow /Warfield theistic evolution: Adam’s body was the product of
evolutionary development (second causes working alone), and his special creation
involved the imparting of a rational soul to a highly-developed hominid.

we employ the precise sense of “theistic evolution” because of its clarity and its
relation to Darwinism.

• Micro-evolution: genetic variations over time (or evolution) within certain limits
(i.e. within a type or kind).

• Macro-evolution: evolution that crossest he boundary of “kinds.”

7. Science.
• Loaded definition: “science is limited to explaining the natural world by means of
natural processes” (National Science Teachers Association).

• Proposed replacement: “The sciences are disciplines that study features of the
world around us, looking for regularities as well as attempting to account for causal
relations. In the causal chains we allow all relevant factors (including supernatural
ones) to be considered.”

8. Harmonization.
when we speak of finding a harmonization of two accounts, we mean that

<a id="ga28-p139"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=141 printed_page=139 -->

though they have the appearance of being at odds, we want to find away of adjusting
our understanding of one or both of the ms oas to allow them to agree a tits heart, this
enterprise assumes that the data from the two sources are true, but our interpretations of
the data may need adjustment.

this revision of interpretations works both ways: a theological conviction may
properly be used to reject a natural science position. However, we do not seriously
consider core christian doctrines as open to revision on the basis of natural science.

harmonization of our interpretation of the bible and our interpretation of the
natural world is proper when:

• the scientific result in question does not require a world-view antithetical to the
Biblical one;
• the concerns of the scientific result are the same as those of the biblical passage;
• the scientific interpretation will stand the test of time.

the result of all this is that we cannot make a blanket statement about
harmonizations, other than “be careful!” We should be cautious about trumpeting our
harmonization as “proving” the Bible is right, in view of the factors mentioned here, on
the other hand, under certain circumstances we can show that a harmonization is
plausible so the disputer cannot say that he has “proved” the Bible wrong. Nor should
we reject out of hand efforts to integrate the results of exegesis with the tentative
conclusions of the sciences.

9. General Revelation
definition of general revelation

In its very first sentence24, the Westminster Confession of Faith recognizes a
source of revelation from “the light of nature and the works of creation and
providence.” Numerous Reformed theologians have discussed this revelation using the
term general revelation, to distinguish it from the special revelation of holy Scripture.
This revelation is general because it comes to all men everywhere, and is sufficient, as
the Confession states, to “leave men inexcusable” because of its testimony to the
goodness, wisdom and power of God.

Berkhof25 in his well-known Systematic Theology comments:

the bible testifies to a twofold revelation of God: a revelation in nature
round about us, in human consciousness, and in the providential
government of the world, and a revelation embodied in the Bible as the
Word of God.

24 WCF, Chapter 1. Section 1
25 Berkhof, L., Systematic Theology, 4th Edition (1941), p. 36ff.

<a id="ga28-p140"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=142 printed_page=140 -->

with regard to the former he references the following passages of Scripture: Ps. 19:1,2,
Acts 14:17, Rom 1: 19,20. He goes on to quote Benjamin Warfield, who distinguishes
between general and special revelation in these words:

The one is addressed generally to all intelligent creatures, and is
therefore accessible to all men; the other is addressed to a special class
of sinners, to whom God would make known His salvation. The one has
in view to meet and supply the natural need of creatures for knowledge
of their God; the other to rescue broken and deformed sinners from their
sin and its consequences.26

With this foundation, Berkhof then defines general revelation in the following words:

General revelation is rooted in creation, is addressed to man as man, and
more particularly to human reason, and finds its purpose in the
realization of the end of his creation, to know God and thus enjoy
communion with Him.

IV. Description of the main interpretations of Genesis 1-3 and the Creation
Days
one of the difficulties in the current discussion regarding the proper
interpretation of the genesis account of creation is understanding the various views.
with the exception of the calendar day view and the Day-Age view, other views are
often misunderstood. Friend and foe alike struggle to describe and explain the nuances
of some of these views. Consequently, confusion and suspicion often result. In order to
address this problem, the CSC has determined to provide a brief description of the main
views represented in the PCA, as well as a few other lesser known views. We have
attempted to state the views in such a way that its proponents would approve, while at
the same time avoiding a polemical tone. The “Objections” section gathered objections
from opposing positions, and in some cases offers responses to them. Such an objective
presentation of the various views or interpretations may thus prove useful to the church
in bringing a satisfactory resolution to the current controversy.

A. The Calendar-Day Interpretation
Definition of the Position
the bible teaches that god created of nothing all things in six days, by which
Moses meant six calendar days. The view is often called the literal view, the traditional
view, or the twenty-four-hour view.

Description of the Position
Those holding the Calendar-Day view are fully committed to Bavinck’s
affirmation regarding the importance of the doctrine of creation. “There is no existence

26 Ibid., p. 37, quoting Warfield's Revelation and Inspiration, p. 6.

<a id="ga28-p141"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=143 printed_page=141 -->

apart from God, and the Creator can only be known truly through revelation.”27
Elsewhere he says, “The doctrine of creation, affirming the distinction between the
Creator and His creatures, is the starting point of true religion.”28 “Creation is thus
more than just about the age of the earth and the evolutionary origins of humanity,
important as these questions are.”29

It is often suggested that the important thing to learn from Genesis 1 is that God
is the creator, but not the details about creation. it is the conviction of those holding the
Calendar-Day view that the length of the days is a detail that is ‘truthful and exact’ and
is thus an essential part of the creation account.

The Lutheran scholar H. C. Leupold speaks very pointedly to this subject. It is
not a case of “either — or”, but of “both — and.”

The details are truthful, exact and essential, being in all their parts truth
itself. Only since this is the case, are the broad, basic truths conveyed by
the account also of infinite moment and in themselves divinely revealed
truth. Faith in inspiration, as taught by the Scriptures, allows for no other
possibility.30

the words of Dr, sid dyer speak of the importance of accepting genesis 1 in a
literal sense:
forsaking the literal interpretation of genesis 1 reduces its revelatory
significance. The literary framework hypothesis reduces the entire
chapter to a general statement that God created everything in an orderly
fashion. How God actually did create is left unanswered. We end up
with too much saying too little. The literal interpretation, on the other
hand, takes the entire chapter in its full revelatory significance. Rather
than seeing Genesis 1 as presenting God as a creative author, it sees God
as the author of creation, who brought it into being by His spoken
word.31

We thus look upon the Church’s shrinking from acceptance of the plain meaning of the
creation account, no matter how innocent the intent, as opening the door to the
undermining of the credibility of her gospel message

27See p. 1 of this Report.
2SHerman Bavinck. In the Beginning, foundations of creation Theology, edited by John Bolt,
translated by John Vriend (Grand Rapids: Baker Book House, 1999). p 23.
29Ibid, p 18.
30 H. C. Leupold, exposition of Genesis, (Grand Rapids: Baker Book House, 1950), Vol. I, p 105.
Sid Dyer, "The New Testament Doctrine of Creation” in Did God Create in Six Days?, ed
Joseph A. Pipa, Jr., and David W. Hall, (Taylors. SC: Southern Presbyterian Press and Oak Ridge. TN:
The Covenant Foundatioa 1999). p. 237.

<a id="ga28-p142"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=144 printed_page=142 -->

The Calendar-Day view may be described very simply. It accepts the first
chapter of genesis as historical and chronological in character, and views the creation
week as consisting of six twenty-four hour days, followed by a twenty-four hour
Sabbath. Since Adam and Eve were created as mature adults32, so the rest of creation
came forth from its maker. The Garden included full-grown trees and animals, which
adam named those holding this view believe this is the normal understanding of the
creation account, and that this has been the most commonly held understanding of this
account both in Jewish and Christian history.

this view accepts the genesis account of creation as historical narrative in
answer to the claims of some evangelicals that genesis 1 is poetical in character, the
late Dr. Edward J. young of westminster seminary says:

to escape from the plain factual statements of genesis some
evangelicals are saying that the early chapters of genesis are poetry or
myth, by which they mean that they are not to be taken as
straightforward accounts, and that the acceptance of such a view
removes the difficulties.. To adopt such a view, they say, removes all
troubles with modern science.. Genesis is not poetry. There are poetical
accounts of creation in the Bible— Psalm 104, and certain chapters in
Job— and they differ completely from the first chapter of Genesis.
Hebrew poetry had certain characteristics, and they are not found in the
first chapter of Genesis. So the claim that Genesis One is poetry is no
solution to the question.33

the literary structure of genesis 1-3 favors the calendar-day understanding of
the text. typical of hebrew narrative one finds in genesis 1:1, “In the beginning, God
created the heavens and the earth,” a general introductory statement regarding all of
creation. As Douglas Kelly says,

the writer of genesis could not have made a broader statement than
that. ‘Heavens and the earth’ is away of saying ‘everything that exists’,
whether galaxies, nebulae or solar systems, all things from the farthest
reaches of outer space to the smallest grain of sand or bacterial microbe
on planet earth, absolutely everything was created by God.34

having thus introduced the subject of creation the remainder of the
chapters peaks more particularly of how god created the heavens and
the earth, with particular reference to the earth. This whole account
stands a san introduction to the rest of the book of genesis and of the

32 See Bavinck. Ibid., p. 249.
33 Edward J. Young, In the Beginning: Genesis 1-3 and the authority of scripture (Edinburgh:
Banner of Truth Trust. 1976), pp. 18-19.
34Douglas F. Kelly, Creation and Change, Genesis 1.1-2.4 in the light of changing scientific
Paradigms (Ross-shire: Christian Focus Publications, 1997), p.45.

<a id="ga28-p143"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=145 printed_page=143 -->

whole Bible The very next verse, Genesis 2:4, is important for the
structure of Genesis, it stands in the Hebrew text like a great signpost on
a major highway, pointing the way forward into there st of the book. Its
words ‘These are the generations’ (in Hebrew toledoth) offers a clue that
this is where the second part of genesis begins, with a great narrowing
down of emphasis from the whole creation to one selected area, namely,
the story of mankind.35

Genesis 2 is thus not see nasa second account of creation, but rather as a
detailing of the particulars regarding man, his creation, the garden of Eden, the creation
of woman, the probation and fall. In chapter 3 we are brought to the purpose of there st
of the Bible, namely, the account of g od’s redemption of sinners.

The Calendar-Day view takes at face value the words of the text of genesis 1.
There is a three-fold usage of the word “day” (ydm ) in the Genesis account. In each
case the context is so clear that there is no question as to which meaning is intended.
For example, the light is called day (verse 5) and the darkness is called night, and in the
same verse the phrase “there was evening and there was morning, one day.” Also the
whole week of creation is called the “day in which the Lord created” (Genesis 2:4).
the meaning of the word “day” in each case is clear from the context.

the length of the creation days is the same as the length of any other day (ydm)
found elsewhere in Scripture. that this is the proper understanding of the length of the
day is to be seen in the fact that everywhere that the Bible uses the word day (ydm) as
modified by an ordinal (as ‘Day One’ and ‘Day Two’) it always means normal solar
day.
Having created light and separated the day and night, God had completed His
first day’s work. “The evening and the morning were the first day.” This same formula
is used at the conclusion of each of the six days of creation. It is thus obvious that the
duration of each of the days, including the first, was the same. Beginning with the first
day and continuing through the sixth day, there was established a cyclical succession of
days and nights— periods of light and periods of darkness. The formula “there was
evening and there was morning” is used as a connective between the days of the
creation week, and thus does not occur following the seventh day, because a description
of the eighth day does not follow. That obviously does not mean there was not an
eighth day, or that the seventh day continues indefinitely. Adam and Eve in the Garden
observed their first full day as a sabbath of re stand communion with God.

Henry Morris says:

in the first chapter of Genesis, the termination of each day’s work is
noted by the formula: ‘And the evening and the morning were the first
[or “second,” etc.] day.’ Thus each ‘day’ had distinct boundaries and
was one ina series of days, both of which criteria are never present in

35Ib id , p. 46.

<a id="ga28-p144"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=146 printed_page=144 -->

the Old Testament writings unless literal days are intended. The writer
of genesis was trying to guard in every way possible against any of his
readers deriving the notion of non-literal days from his record.36

thought he creation of the sun and moon did not occur until the fourth day, this
is not a problem for the Calendar-Day view. the book of revelation indicates that
there will not be sun or moon, but god will bethe light of the new heavens and the new
earth. Thus, for God, the sun and moon are not necessary as light bearers. The first
three days were not technically solar days (not governed by the position of the earth in
relation to the sun), but the Bible indicates that their lengths are measured in the same
way as the last three, which are true solar days.

the new testament in its various citations of and allusions to genesis 1-11
clearly assumes the “plain, historical/chronological” understanding of the creation, the
establishment of the family, the fall, the curse and the unfolding of the coming
redemption. This favors the Calendar-Day view of genesis 1. Douglas Kelly cites
Hubert Thomas, who has examined the New Testament allusions to the creation as
follows:

In effect three main points are demonstrated by reading the list we
provide. These three points confirm that the New Testament can in no
case whatsoever be appealed to in order to sustain any sort of
evolutionary theory. First, without exception, references to creation and
especially the citations of genesis 1 to 11 point to historical events. It is
no different than the historical death of the lord jesus christ on
Golgotha. As far as the New Testament is concerned, creation ex-nihilo
and the creation of adam and Eve, Cain and Abel, Noah and the Flood,
there is no legend and no parable; all deal with persons and events of
historical and universal significance.

Second, without exception creation is always mentioned as a unique
event which took place at a particular moment in past time. Creation
took place; it was accomplished. Events occurred which corrupted the
world, and now it awaits a new creation which will take place in the
future at a given moment. Third, the details and recitations of the
creation given in Genesis 1 to 3 are considered to be literally true,
historical and also of surpassing importance. The New Testament
doctrine based upon these citations would be without validity and even
erroneous if the primeval events were not historically true. For instance:
consider the entry of sin into the world if adam were not the head of

36Henry M. Morris, The Genesis Record : A Scientific and Devotional Commentary on the
Book of Beginnings, (Grand Rapids: Baker Book House, 1976), pp. 55-56.

<a id="ga28-p145"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=147 printed_page=145 -->

the whole human race, then Jesus Christ [the last Adam] is not head of
the new creation.37

Documentation of the Position
David G. Hagopian, ed., The Genesis Debate (Crux Press, forthcoming in May). This
work includes a defense of the Calendar-Day View by Ligon Duncan and David
Hall, in addition to presentations of the Day-Age Interpretation (by Hugh Ross
and Gleason Archer) and of the framework theory (by Lee Irons and Meredith
Kline).
Joseph A. Pipa and David W. Hall, Eds., did god create in six Days? (Greenville, SC:
Southern Presbyterian Press and Kuyper Institute, 1999). This work is the
proceedings of greenville presbyterian theological Seminary’s 1999 Spring
Theology Conference and includes articles defining the Calendar-Day View by
Morton Smith, Joey Pipa, Ben Shaw, Sid Dyer, Stuart Patterson, David Hall, and
Duncan Rankin and Steve Berry. In addition, alternative positions are defended
by Jack Collins, Mark Ross, and R. Laird Harris.
Robert L. Reymond, anew systematic theology of the christian faith (Nashville:
Nelson, 1998), 392-398.
Douglas F. Kelly, Creation and Change: Genesis 1.1-2.4 in the light of changing
Scientific Paradigms (Fearn-Tain: Mentor, 1997).
Wayne Grudem, Systematic Theology: An Introduction to Biblical Doctrine (Grand
Rapids, MI: IVP/Zondervan, 1994), 262-314.
Ken Gentry, Reformed Theology and Six Day Creationism (private, 1994).
Nigel M. de S. Cameron, evolution and the authority of the bible (London: Paternoster,
1983,), 46-98.
E. J. Young, “The days of Genesis,” Westminster Theological Journal 25 (1962-63): 1-
34, 143-171.
R. L. Dabney, Lectures in Systematic Theology (Richmond, VA. Committee of
Publication, 1871), 247-256.

Strengths:
1. The Calendar-Day view is the obvious, first-impression reading of genesis 1-3,
in which each of the words is given its most common, plain meaning. This is the
meaning that the author has gone to great lengths to convey.38 It is undoubtedly the

37Hubert Thomas, Mentions de la Creation (GE. 1-11) dans le nouveau Testament Lausanne:
Association Creation, Bible et Science, 1933) as translated by douglas f Kelly, and cited in his Creation
and Change: Genesis 1.1-2.4 in the light of changing scientific paradigms (Fearn-Tain: Mentor, 1997),
pp. 129-130.
3* Douglas Kelly cites the liberal scholar Marcus Dods as follows: “The candid interpreter
cannot avoid being literal, if for example the word ‘day’ in these chapters does not mean a period of
twenty-four hours, the interpretation of scripture is hopeless.” from Expositors Bible (Edinburgh: T. & T.
Clark, 1888), p. 4, as cited by Kelly, Ibid, p. 50. Kelly also says, “More recently, Oxford Professor
James Barr (author of Fundamentalism, a recent book rejecting traditional supernatural Christianity with
its high view of Scripture) has written to much the same effect as Dods: . . . as far a si know there is no
professor of Hebrew or Old Testament in any world-class university who does not believe that the

<a id="ga28-p146"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=148 printed_page=146 -->

meaning that the unsophisticated (by today’s standards) initial audience would have understood the account to have. The view is neither difficult to explain nor to justify because of its simple and straightforward relationship to the text. This fact is vitally important, for it means that the average believer today can read the Word of God and understand it without the benefit of some higher level of learning reserved only to the scholars. Thus this view best preserves the perspicuity of Scripture (WCF I.7; Psalm 119:130).

2. The Calendar-Day view raises no questions and leaves no doubt as to the historicity of Genesis 1-3.

3. The Calendar-Day view provides the basis for the theological logic of and is confirmed by the Fourth Commandment as recorded in Exodus 20:11, in which the seven-day cycle of work and rest is affirmed. “The Sabbath was made for man,” said our Lord Jesus (Mark 2:27).

4. The Calendar-Day view comports with the concept that Adam was the peak of God’s creation, the covenantal head and steward over all creation. It affirms that death is penal, entering the created order upon the fall (Romans 5:12). Thus, before man’s sin and the resulting curse of God, there was no death among Adam’s animal kingdom (Genesis 1:28, Genesis 2:21). “Cursed are you more than all cattle, and more than every beast of the field” (Genesis 3:14). “For the creation”, which God had announced to be “very good,” “was subjected to vanity, not of its own will, but by reason of him who subjected it, in hope that the creation itself also shall be delivered from bondage of corruption into the liberty of the glory of the children of God. For we know that the whole creation groaneth and travailleth in pain together until now.” (Romans 8:20-22).

5. The Calendar-Day view was that of the earliest post-canonical commentaries (e.g., Basil, Ambrose), of the medieval Scholastics (e.g., Aquinas, Lombard), of the magisterial Reformers (e.g., Luther, Calvin, Beza), and of the Puritans (e.g., Ainsworth, Ussher, Ames, Perkins, Owen, Edwards)³⁹. It is the only view known to be espoused by any of the Westminster divines, which the Assembly affirmed over against the instantaneous view (e.g., Augustine, Anselm, and Colet).⁴⁰

writer(s) of Genesis 1-11 intended to convey to their readers the ideas that (a) creation took place in a series of six days which were the same as the days of 24 hours we now experience . . .” pp. 50-51.

³⁹ “The other view adheres to the literal sense of the creation narrative, including that of six days. It was followed by Tertullian, Basil, Gregory of Nyssa, Ephraem, John of Damascus. Later on it achieved almost exclusive dominance in Scholasticism, in Roman Catholic as well as Protestant theology, although the alternative exegesis of Augustine was consistently discussed with respect and never branded as heretical.” Herman Bavinck, *In the Beginning, Foundations of Creation Theology* (English translation, Grand Rapids: Baker, 1999)106.

⁴⁰ Of course, Augustine himself was not consistent in his position nor insistent on its acceptance. Nor did the universal respect that he enjoyed lead to acceptance. Indeed, as these quotes from Bavinck indicate, the view was widely rejected, perhaps as a result of the action of the Westminster Divines? “Augustine, . . . at times deviated from his own simultaneity theory.” p.117. “Augustine’s opinion. . . presented only as a possible, not as an undoubted, interpretation, was usually discussed by

<a id="ga28-p147"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=149 printed_page=147 -->

6. The Calendar-Day view stands on the basis of special revelation, rather than being indebted to or dependent upon any particular ancient or modern scientific worldview, whether it be that of uniformitarian geology, Darwinian evolution, Big Bang cosmology, or even creation science. A theology wed to the science of one age is a widow in the next.⁴¹

7. The Genesis 1 account builds in a logical manner from the inanimate to the animate, finally climaxing with man as the focus of creation. The use of ordinals with yōm, which is always an indication of sequence, reinforces this development. Elsewhere in the Bible, every use of the ordinal with yōm correlates with its normal-day meaning, nor has any contrary example been found in extra-biblical writings.

8. The Calendar-Day view is that of the Southern Presbyterian tap root of the PCA (e.g., Dabney, Thornwell, Girardeau), which strongly resisted attempts from abroad (e.g., Chalmers, Miller), from her Northern cousins (e.g., Hodge, Warfield), and even from within (e.g., Adger) to broaden the church on this point, as is documented in the Woodrow Evolution Controversy⁴² last century and the Continuing Church movement’s resistance to the action of the 1969 PCUS General Assembly.⁴³

Calendar-Day proponents welcome structural and linguistic analyses of the Genesis account, as long as these new tools are used in the light of analogy of Scripture and the rule of faith. Critical care, informed by a full appreciation for the exegetical and theological complexities involved, is required in order not to cast doubt on the truth, historicity, chronology, and ultimately on the meaning of the text. Far from demanding some alternative meaning, the context and markers all support the plain reading. Indeed, the author seems to have gone to great lengths to make it clear that it is this and no other meaning that he is trying to convey. Therefore, unfolding the theological and apologetical richness of the passage is not at odds with, nor does it raise any necessary objections to, the Calendar-Day view.

**Objections:**

1. Because of the prevailing spirit of this “scientific” age, the traditional view is easily caricatured as anti-intellectual and classed along with those of geo-centrists and flat-earthers.⁴⁴ An objective study of contemporary works by scholars such as Walt Brown and Henry Morris and numerous papers in journals such as the “Creation

theologians with appreciation but (was) nevertheless quite generally rejected because it seemed to do violence to the text of Holy Scripture.” p. 123-4.

⁴¹ “(Theology) needs to be on its guard against making premature concessions to, and to seek agreement with, the so-called scientific results which can at any time be knocked down and exposed in their untenability by more thorough research.” Bavinck, p. 133.

⁴² *Did God Create in Six Days?*, Ed. By J. A. Pipa, Jr. and D. W. Hall, Chapter 3 by W. D. Rankin and S. R. Berry.

⁴³ *Ibid.*, Chapter 1 by M. H. Smith, p. 24.

⁴⁴ See, e.g., H. Ross and G. L. Archer, unpublished manuscript entitled, “The Day-Age Interpretation,” endnote number 109.

<a id="ga28-p148"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=150 printed_page=148 -->

Research Society Quarterly" will readily demonstrate the fallacy of this characterization.

2. Some argue that creation of the sun and moon on the fourth day provides a decisive case against the calendar-day meaning of the first through third days. The argument is that "whatever the nature of the first three days, they could not have been ordinary solar days since there was no sun". This argument—first made by the ancient pagan Celsus—fails to recognize the anti-mythological polemic of Moses. Since the sun and moon were worshiped by both the Egyptians and Mesopotamians, Moses reports that God did not even create them until the fourth day, clearly demonstrating that they were therefore not necessary for the establishment of day and night, thus strongly asserting their creatureliness and the utter contingency of the created order. God Himself determines the nature of a day on the first (and every other) day, not celestial bodies or pagan objects of worship. ["He also made the stars." Gen 1:16] God alone rules all of His creation, including time, which is ultimately contingent upon Him alone.

This argument against ordinary days usually focuses on the absence of solar illumination on those days, and various proposals have been put forward for alternative sources of light that could mimic solar illumination. The argument and its rebuttals are exercises in futility for a number of reasons. The first and most fundamental is that there was no observer of the light on those days except God Himself, and Scripture tells us that light and darkness are alike to Him (Psalm 139:12). Therefore, besides the irrelevance of the sun's presence or absence, we can know nothing of the nature of those days except what God has chosen to reveal to us. And He has done that in this account in Genesis 1. Far from "calling God's veracity into question" (to quote another objection lodged against the Calendar-Day view), this view simply takes God at His word. It is attempts to devise alternatives to the days He describes that question what He is able to do and what He has told us He has done. ["Hath God really said?"] Origen is quoted in the history section of this paper as asking the question: "What person of any intelligence would think that there existed a first, second, and third day, and evening and morning, without sun, moon, and stars?" The obvious answer is that the author of Genesis did, and we have no hesitation in accepting his account. After all, we all believe he wrote under the direct inspiration of the only Witness of these momentous events.

The argument concerning light before the sun was created suffers exactly the failing that the calendar-day proponents are often accused of, namely, insistence on understanding the creation account in technical, mechanistic terms. [Some attempts to rebut the objection err similarly.] Those pursuing these arguments fret over an alternative source of "light," while the absence of the sun on the first three days would pose much more serious problems for any naturalistic explanation than merely the absence of its illumination would. For example, absent the gravitational potential of the sun, what determined the disposition of the earth in space? The answer is obvious: God, through the working of His supernatural providence, must have sustained the

<a id="ga28-p149"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=151 printed_page=149 -->

components of his as-yet-incomplete creation however He wished 45 and set them in
their “natural” orbits as each took its place in the incomplete creation He is free to
work “without, above, or against” second cau ses46 Obviously, He chose to sustain this
portion of his creation without the intermediary of secondary causes or agents4'

The light issue seems to be superficial in yet another respect What we call
“light”, and what the early readers of this account no doubt would have understood it to
mean, is visible light, which we know is but a minute fraction of the entire
electromagnetic spectrum When God created “light” (Gen 1:3), we surely are to
understand that he created the entire panoply of wave phenomena that make possible
all of the interactions that hold the components of the universe together and serve as the
vehicle for all nuclear, chemical, and gravitational phenomena

there have been various attempts to resolve the dilemma of “solar days” without
the sun. One suggestion is that perhaps the light bearers were actually created on the
first day and only “appointed” to their respective roles on the fourth day Those who
pursue this line of argument usually propose that these heavenly bodies were hidden
(from whom?) by some sort of cloud cover until the fourth day except for the fact that
this assumption contradicts the clear statement in verses 14-19, such a scenario would
pose no difficulty to the Calendar-Day view, as it clearly does to those who posit “days”
of eons in length An alternative view (dating back at least as far as Basil), that is much
more consistent with that proposed above, is that the light of the first three days was
light emanating from God Himself, just as the description of the final state indicates that
God will be the light, not the sun or moon “And the city hath no need of the sun,
neither of the moon, to shine upon it for the glory of god did lighten it, and the lamp
thereof is the Lamb ” (Rev 21:22) Thus the Bible opens with God shedding His light
upon the creation and closes with the same

3. Some have asserted that this view “seems not to take science seriously and
impugns the veracity of god because, on the one hand, it dismisses central conclusions
of the current scientific consensus on cosmogony and, on the other hand, it supposedly
requires one to view the general-revelation evidence as to the age of the earth as
misleading.” This criticism is based on the assumption that man is able to interpret
general revelation correctly without the light of special revelation that assumption
reverses the proper principle of biblical interpretation, which is, that special revelation
must govern our understanding of general revelation those of us who hold the

45Bavinck. Ibid., p.250. . . a miracle is not a violation of natural law and no intervention in
the natural order From God's side it is an act that does not more immediately and directly have God as
its cause than any ordinary event, and in the counsel of God and the plan of the world it occupies as much
an equally well-ordered and harmonious place as any natural phenomenon. In miracles God only puts
into effect a special force which, like any other force, operates in accordance with its own nature and
therefore also has an outcome of its own.”
46 Westminster Confession of Faith. Chapter V. paragraph 3
47 “The genesis of things is always controlled by other laws than their subsequent development.
The laws issued by the creature are not the rule of creation, still less that of the Creator." Bavinck. p

<a id="ga28-p150"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=152 printed_page=150 -->

Calendar-Day view make no apology for arriving, after careful consideration of the facts, at conclusions that differ from this so-called consensus. It is not the veracity of God which is impugned but the evolutionary presuppositions of the majority (not consensus) of the scientific community whose assumptions are regularly passed off as facts. Furthermore, it seems disingenuous to fault the Calendar-Day view for differing with current scientific dogma when creationists of all stripes claim to reject the most dominant aspect of that dogma, namely, evolutionary origins of the species. One unique strength of the Calendar-Day view is that it leaves no room to accommodate any version of evolutionism, Theistic or otherwise, while some other theories seem bent on finding some common ground with it.⁴⁸

4. “The view tends to read the text only against the background of a modern world and life view, with its interest in timing and mechanisms. This obscures the fact that the precise form as well as the content of Genesis 1 was predestined by God to be a means of grace first to Israel (and, of course, no less to us), which had a very different world view. If we are rightly to interpret the text, we must take full account of the historical process of revelation.”

In answer, we contend that, if this account is historical, then it had “timing and mechanisms.” The only question of interest to us is whether God has chosen to reveal anything of that timing to us. We believe He went to great lengths to do so. And the only “mechanism” we propose is God’s speaking all things into existence and then sustaining them by means known only to Himself. As explained in section 2 above, this had to involve the exercise of supernatural providence.⁴⁹

As to Israel’s different world view, it would seem to us that the world view of a technically primitive people would have far more in common with our plain reading of the record than with views requiring 20ᵗʰ century scientific and linguistic tools. And, of course, it is views such as Day-Age that rely on mechanistic details (such as overlapping long “days”) that have far more in common with the prevailing scientific paradigm than with the simple picture unfolded in Genesis.

5. “God created the luminaries on the fourth day ‘to serve as signs to mark seasons and days and years’ (Genesis 1:14). These bodies are a kind of standard so that human beings can identify days and years. Trying to give a timing for the first three days ignores this role which Genesis 1 gives to the sun in governing the day (Genesis 1:16). This should make us hesitate to offer a timing for the first three days.”

This seems to be in the character of a straw-man issue in that the sun could not have served in this assigned role during the first three days, even if it were already there, since there were no human beings present to be concerned with identifying days

⁴⁸ This appears to be true especially of the Gap, Day-Age and Progressive-Creation views.
⁴⁹ “All the works of God *ad extra*, which are subsequent to creation, are works of His providence.” Bavinck, p. 244; “(I)t is the same omnipotent and omnipresent power of God that is at work both in creation and in providence.” Bavinck, p. 247.

<a id="ga28-p151"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=153 printed_page=151 -->

and years. We too would hesitate to invent or impose a timing for the first three or any other days. But we have no hesitation about accepting, at face value, what God says about them. Doing so in no way diminishes the significance of the roles for which these bodies were created nor our affirmation of those purposes.

6. Several similar objections have been expressed. They all have to do with the relationship between the account in Genesis 1 and that in the early verses of chapter 2. It is claimed that the Calendar-Day view presents a difficulty in harmonizing the accounts of Genesis 1:1-2:3 and 2:4-25 because Genesis 2:5 offers an ordinary-providence based reason for there being no shrub or herb, namely that there was no rain. “The Calendar-Day view offers no explanation” for the different order of narration found in Genesis 1 and Genesis 2. And, “In creating the garden of Eden, God caused trees to grow up (Genesis 2:9). The specific language indicates not creation in a moment, but rather a process of growth.”⁵⁰ The text gives no indication that an extraordinarily quick growth of trees is intended. The Israelite would understand the words in terms of his experience of the growth of trees. The Calendar-Day view does not explain this timing in relation to Genesis 1.”

Genesis 2:9 refers to God’s causing trees to grow out of the ground while the preceding verse refers to the garden He “had planted” and the man He “had created” (NIV). While the tenses of the verbs in chapter 1 are unambiguous, those here in chapter 2 can be understood as either past or past perfect. The principle of interpretation that says one should interpret obscure passages in terms of clearer ones would suggest that it is the past perfect tense that is indicated here. Assuming the simple past tense unnecessarily introduces an apparent conflict with the timing and sequence of the account in chapter 1. This seems to be what Bavinck had in mind when he said, “In the first chapter, therefore, the story of the creation of all other things (i.e., other than humanity) is told at some length and in a regular order, but the creation of humanity is reported succinctly; the second chapter presupposes the creation of heaven and earth, follows no chronological but only a topical order, and does not say when the plants and animals are created but only describes the relation in which they basically stand to human beings.”⁵¹

As for what the first audience would have understood, they surely would have known that Genesis 1 was an account of God’s supernatural creation of all things and would have had no difficulty in accepting this account in chapter 2 of His equally miraculous preparation of a special place for the crown of His creation. “Genesis 2:4b-9 does not imply that the plants were formed after human creation, but only that the garden of Eden was planted after that event.”⁵² And they surely understood that He

⁵⁰ Robert Alter translates, “And the LORD God caused to sprout from the soil every tree...” *Genesis, Translation and Commentary* (New York: Norton, 1996) 8.
⁵¹ Bavinck, p. 138
⁵² *Ibid.*, p. 138

<a id="ga28-p152"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=154 printed_page=152 -->

initially created trees and not merely seeds that eventually grew into trees.53 If Genesis
2:4-25 is complementary to Genesis 1:1-2:3, the creation week should be longer than
six calendar-days. it is on lyon insisting that all of the developments taking place in this
extraordinary time had to have occurred via natural processes that a timing problem
arises that needs to be explained In our view there is no timing problem and we don’t
feel obligated to try to explain problems inherent in others’ views.

B. The Day-Age Interpretation
In attempting to produce a template document about the Day-Age interpretation
of creation for the committee to discuss, edit, append and adopt, we divided the
discussion into eight sections which we introduce with the following eight questions,
the answers to which are, for us, fundamental to a fuller understanding of this view

1. What is the ‘Day-Age’ interpretation?
2. what is the meaning of the hebrew word Yom?
3 who has held a view that allows for creative days of unspecified length9
4 Is the Day-Age interpretation just a reaction to Darwinism9
5. how do you deal with the issue of death within this view?
6 how do you deal with the issue of time within this view9
7. what are the strengths of the Day-Age interpretation?
8. What are the difficulties for the Day-Age interpretation9

1. What is the ‘Day-Age’ interpretation?
The ‘Day-Age’ interpretation of the creative days in genesis 1has taken various
forms in its contemporary expressions, and those which have been held within
conservative Reformed circles are outlined below and contain certain common features.
This view has been held by such conservative Reformed theologians as those from the
old princeton seminary tradition of the hodges and w arfield54 and more recently as
expressed by J. Oliver Buswell, Jr 55 and R. Laird Harris,56 both of whom were on the
original faculty of covenant theological seminary and taught the reform any years

53 “For the world was not created in a state of pure potency, as chaos ora nebulous cloud, but
as an ordered cosmos and human beings were placed in it not as helpless toddlers but as an adult man
and an adult woman. Development could only proceed from such a ready-made world, and that is how
creation presented it to providence.” Bavinck, p. 249.
54 Charles Hodge Systematic Theology, 3 vols. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1952 (1871)], I, 568-
574; cf also James M. Boice, Genesis: An Expositional Commentary, 3 vols. [Grand Rapids: Zondervan,
1982] I, 68 [Grand Rapids: Baker, 1998], I. 78-79.
55 J. Oliver Buswell, a systematic theology of the christian Religion, 2 vols. [Grand Rapids:
Zondervan, 1962], I, 139-162.
36 R. Laird Harris, “The Length of the Creative Days in Genesis 1” in Joseph A. Pipa, Jr. and
David W. Hall, eds.. Did God Create in Six Days [Taylors, S.C: Southern Presbyterian Press and
Oakridge. TN: The Covenant Foundation, 1999] 101-111.

<a id="ga28-p153"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=155 printed_page=153 -->

a. The ‘six days’ are understood in the same sense as “in that day” of Isaiah 11:10-11⁵⁷—that is, as periods of indefinite length and not necessarily of 24 hours duration. There are other similar uses of the Hebrew word for “day” (yōm) in Scripture to support this view of periods longer than 24 hours including that in the very context of Genesis 2:4. Another argument for this approach is that the seventh day in Genesis 1 is not concluded with the boundary phrase, “and there was evening, and there was morning” as with the other days, and therefore it continues, as indicated by Hebrews 4:1-11’s quotation⁵⁸ of Psalm 95:11.

b. The six days are taken as sequential, but as overlapping and merging into one another, much as an expression like “the day of the Protestant Reformation” might have only a proximate meaning and might overlap with “the day of the Renaissance.” While exponents of this view might be willing to concede a rough parallel between day one and day four, day two and day five, day three and day six, they would tend to deny that this is an intended parallel by Moses as author, as is commonly claimed in the Framework interpretation.

c. The Day-Age interpretation claims that the narrative of Genesis 1 is from the point of view of the earth as being prepared for the habitation of man. In this context, the explanation of day four is often that the sun only became visible on that day, as atmospheric conditions allowed the previous alternation of light and darkness to be perceived from the earth to have its source from the position of the previously created sun and other heavenly bodies.⁵⁹ However day four is understood, the point is made

⁵⁷ In that day the Root of Jesse will stand as a banner for the peoples; the nations will rally to him, and his place of rest will be glorious. In that day the Lord will reach out his hand a second time to reclaim the remnant that is left of his people from Assyria, from Lower Egypt, from Upper Egypt, from Cush, from Elam, from Babylonia, from Hamath and from the islands of the sea (Isa 11:10-11).

⁵⁸ Therefore, since the promise of entering his rest still stands, let us be careful that none of you be found to have fallen short of it. For we also have had the gospel preached to us, just as they did; but the message they heard was of no value to them, because those who heard did not combine it with faith. Now we who have believed enter that rest, just as God has said, “So I declared on oath in my anger, ‘They shall never enter my rest’” And yet his work has been finished since the creation of the world. For somewhere he has spoken about the seventh day in these words: “And on the seventh day God rested from all his work.” And again in the passage above he says, “They shall never enter my rest.” It still remains that some will enter that rest, and those who formerly had the gospel preached to them did not go in, because of their disobedience. Therefore God again set a certain day, calling it Today, when a long time later he spoke through David, as was said before: “Today, if you hear his voice, do not harden your hearts.” For if Joshua had given them rest, God would not have spoken later about another day. There remains, then, a Sabbath-rest for the people of God; for anyone who enters God’s rest also rests from his own work, just as God did from his. Let us, therefore, make every effort to enter that rest, so that no one will fall by following their example of disobedience (Heb 4:1-11).

⁵⁹ Such a view is described in Charles Hodge, *Systematic Theology*, I, 569-570 and is also discussed in William G.T. Shedd, *Dogmatic Theology*, 3 vols. (Grand Rapids Mich: Zondervan, 1950; reprint of 1988-94 edition), I, 479-480, 483. That this view was contemplated even in the 17th century may be shown by John Milton’s account of the first day in *Paradise Lost*, Book VII, lines 243-249:

Let there be Light. Said God, and forthwith Light
Ethereal, first of things, quintessence pure
Sprung from the Deep and from her Native East
To journie through the airie gloom began,

<a id="ga28-p154"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=156 printed_page=154 -->

that on lyon that day is the diurnal cycle of days governed by the sun begun, so that it is
difficult to know the nature of the first three days.

2. What is the meaning of the Hebrew word Yom?
The Hebrew word yom , “day,” is obviously used in the Bible, like our English
word ‘day,’ to mean a period of 24 hours, however, also like its English counterpart, it
may be used to distinguish from the night and therefore represent a period less than 24
hours, such as “in the cool of the day,”60 and it is capable of meaning a period of
unspecified length, as in the prophetic references to “the day of the Lord.”61 In fact, in
Genesis 2:4 the word yom is used in the singular to describe all that transpired in God’s
creation as described as a period of six days in genesis 1. As linguist Dr. Robert E.
long acre has communicated to the committee concerning the range of meaning of yom:

As for the Hebrew words, yo min the immediate vicinity of gen 1 there
occurs an obviously figurative use of the term: “And these are the
generations of the heavens and the earth in the day when the lord god
made the heavens and the earth” (Gen 2:4). Here it is evident that all six
days of creation— however conceived— are summarized as “the day
when the Lord God made the heavens and the earth”—where the N IV
simply translates “the day” as “when.”

the time of the taking of Jerusalem, sacking the City, burning its
palaces, breaking up and salvaging the massive bronze ware of the
temple, destroying the walls of the City, and taking people exile is
referred to in Lamentations 1:20 and 2:21 as “the day of God’s anger.”
Obviously, the events described in II Kings 25 and Jeremiah 39 took
place over a period of time, and, in fact, the actual capture of the city
may have spread over a month because the City then and in Roman
times was cleft by the Tyropoeon valley. the taking of the newer part of
the City with the wall built in Hezekiah’s time evidently occurred first.
Then the Babylonian army, after catching its breath, advanced to the rest
of the city where the temple mount and public buildings we relocated
and reduced that. Pillage, burning, and consolidation of the conquest
probably took even longer. the romans in their later reduction of the
City attacked first the older part and then the Western hill— in opposite
order from the Babylonians. But the sacking and pillaging, as we have
said above, is all referred to as “the day of g od’s anger” in Lamentations
(Lam 1:2 1)— even as those same nations rejoiced saying “This is the
day we have waited for” (Lam 2:16).

Sphear’d in a radiant Cloud, for yet the Sun
Was not; shee in a cloudie Tabernacle
Sojourn’d the while
60 Gen 3:8
61 Eze 13:5, 30:3; Joel 2:11; Oba 1:15; Zep 1:14

<a id="ga28-p155"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=157 printed_page=155 -->

It would be laboring the point to argue that the eschatological “day of the Lord” likewise most probably indicates a period of God’s judgement not a single calendar day.⁶²

It is interesting to note that two of the five Westminster Divines who are known to explicitly support 24-hour days of creation acknowledge this range of interpretation for *yōm*. John White in his commentary⁶³ says about Genesis 2:4 “in the day”: “That is, in that Time that it pleased God to take up in forming them, which we know was in Six days, and not in One. But we find the Word, Day, in Scripture is used commonly to signifie Time Indefinitely.” John Ley in the *1645 Westminster Annotations* on Genesis 2:4 “in the day”: “The day is not here taken (as in the first Chapter and in the beginning of this) for the seventh part of the week, but with more latitude for time in general wherein a thing is done, or to be done; as verse 17 &amp; Luke 19.42. 2 Cor 6.2. Ruth 4.5.”

The interpretation of the creative days as 24-hour days is not to be determined merely by the use of the word *yōm* in Genesis 1.

## 3. Who has held a view that allows for creative days of unspecified length?

The Day-Age approach is not merely of 19th-century origin as a response to Charles Darwin and evolutionary science. From ancient times there was a recognition that the word “day” could mean an extended period of time, although there is no formal evidence of a ‘Day-Age’ view in orthodox Reformed circles before the time of such figures as Hugh Miller⁶⁴ and Robert Shaw⁶⁵ in the Free Church of Scotland. There may have been other fragmentary antecedent views that treated the creative days as longer periods, but not a thoroughly formulated Day-Age system of interpretation.⁶⁶

The Jewish apocalyptic *Book of Jubilees*, written most likely in the 2nd century B.C., says in 4:29-30: “At the end of the nineteenth jubilee, during the seventh week—in its sixth year [930.]—Adam died. All his children buried him in the land where he had been created. He was the first to be buried in the ground. He lacked 70 years from 1000 years because 1000 years are one day in the testimony of heaven.⁶⁷ For this reason it was written regarding the tree of knowledge: ‘On the day that you eat from it you will die.’ Therefore he did not complete the years of this day because he died during it.”

---

⁶² Point 1 in Robert Longacre’s communication to the Committee
⁶³ 1656 *Commentary Upon the Three First Chapters of Genesis*
⁶⁴ 1847: *The Foot-prints of the Creator*, 1857: *The Testimony of the Rocks*
⁶⁵ 1845: *Exposition of the Westminster Confession*
⁶⁶ Michael B. Roberts in his article “Geology and Genesis Unearthed” in *Churchman*, vol. 112, No. 3 (1998), pages 225-255, describes how orthodox and evangelical clergymen in England and Scotland generally were at peace with geological evidence for an old earth in the period 1790-1820. In the period 1820-50 some such clergymen, but only a minority, began to react against such long ages for the existence of the earth.
⁶⁷ Cf. Psalm 90:4 and 2 Peter 3:8

<a id="ga28-p156"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=158 printed_page=156 -->

augustine of hippo (A D. 354-430) discussed creation in five or six different
places, speculating in various ways as to the meaning of the six days, but advocating
mainly a position of instantaneous creation taking place in Genesis 1:1 in the city of
go if8 he said, “What kind of days these were it is extremely difficult, or perhaps
impossible for us to conceive.”

John Calvin used the expression “in the space of six days” in his Commentary
on Genesis 1:5, evidently to distance himself from Augustine’s speculations and
position of instantaneous creation. In the Institutes I, xiv.20, Calvin avoids recounting
the history of the creation of the universe, but refers favorably to the works of basil and
Ambrose. Basil in his Hexaemerori,9 clearly regards the sun as being created only on
the Fourth Day. Likewise in Ambrose’s Hexaemeron70 the sun did not exist until the
Fourth Day Calvin’s Commentary on Genesis 1:14 indicates his belief that the stars,
sun, and moon were made only on the Fourth Day

William Perkins (1558-1602), like Calvin, distanced himself from a view of
creation “in one moment” and spoke of creation in “six distinct days” or “six distinct
spaces of time,” with the sun, moon, and stars not created before the fourth day 71

The Westminster Divines, deriving the language of “in the space of six days”
from Calvin, Perkins, and the Irish Articles (1615) of Archbishop James Ussher, left the
duration of the days of creation unspecified in the confession and Catechisms, perhaps
out of awareness that the days before Day Four were not normal solar days. Although
some members of the Westminster Assembly, particularly the great biblical scholar
John Lightfoot,72 were explicit about 24-hour days, the main concern seems to have
been to differ from instantaneous creation, a view held by such contemporaries as Sir
Thomas Browne and John Milton 73

68 Book 11. Chapter 6
69 Homily VI. 2. 3, and 8 in Nicene and Post Nicene Fathers, VIII. 82, 83. and 87.
70 six days of Creation. Book II, 22; Book III. 27; Book IV, 1 and 3; fathers of the Church.
Vol 42. pp 65. 87. 125-126. and 132.
71 An Exposition of the Symbole or Creed of the Apostles, in Perkins. Works, 3 vols : London,
1612. Vol I. pp. 143-144,
72 light foot held to a number of very specific points that may not have been shared by other
Westminster Divines He argued for creation on the autumnal equinox (Works [1822], Iv.64; vii, 372-
373). whereas Westminster Divine George Walker argued for the vernal equinox (Cod Made visible in
His Workes [1641], 44-47). Lightfoot held that Adam was created at 9 am, on the Sixth Day (Works, II,
335). Eve was tempted "about high noon, the time of eating” (Works, II. 73), and they thus fell on the
Sixth Day, on which Day the angels also fell (Works. II. 74; VII. 373-376) He also believed that the First
Day was 36 hours long (Works. II. 333-334).
73 Basil Willey, The Seventeenth Century Background (New York: Columbia U. Press, 1967),
says that Milton, "like Philo or Sir Thomas Browne, considered that [creation] must in reality' have been
instantaneous” (p.237). Browne, a medical doctor and an Anglican layman, wrote Religio Medici for
private purposes in 1635; it was first published by a friend in 1642. and then he published an authorized
version in 1643, the first year of the westminster Assembly. Willey says. “Brown cannot think that God
took six days to create the world; the six days must rather symbolise the conception of the work in the
mind of God" (p.68) This work and others by Browne were criticized by Claudius Salmasius and by

<a id="ga28-p157"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=159 printed_page=157 -->

Soon after the Westminster Divines, explicit evidence for the Day-Age approach appears, although among less than fully orthodox sources. Thomas Burnet (1635-1715), a chaplain to King William III until dismissed for some of his views on Genesis, argued that the six days might represent periods of undetermined length,⁷⁴ in a work praised by his friend Sir Isaac Newton. Burnet’s view stemmed partly from his understanding that the sun was created only on the fourth day. In 1698, William Whiston, an English Baptist known to modern readers for his edition of Josephus’ works, regarded the days as years.⁷⁵ The Dutch theologian Hermann Venema (1697-1787) opposed the view “that Moses speaks not of ordinary days but of years and of centuries,” showing that such a view was held by some in his circles in the 18th century.

In the 19th century, before Darwin’s 1859 *Origin of Species* and in the midst of much discussion of a geological basis for an “old earth,” Robert Shaw described favorably the possibility of interpreting the days of creation as ages.⁷⁶ Professor Tayler Lewis of the Reformed Church of America advocated long ages in his *The Six Days of Creation*,⁷⁷ as did Donald MacDonald, a minister of the Free Church of Scotland, in his *Creation and the Fall: A Defence and Exposition of the First Three Chapters of Genesis*.⁷⁸ Of the Old Princeton theologians, Charles Hodge, A. A. Hodge, and Benjamin Warfield supported a Day-Age approach, as did also J. Gresham Machen,⁷⁹ O. T. Allis,⁸⁰ and E. J. Young⁸¹ of Westminster Seminary.

J. Oliver Buswell, Jr. also took this position.⁸² In the Reformed Presbyterian Church, Evangelical Synod and Covenant Seminary tradition, so also did R. Laird Harris⁸³ and Francis Schaeffer.⁸⁴

Alexander Ross, but his views show that belief in instantaneous creation was being fostered contemporaneously with the Westminster Assembly.

⁷⁴ Telluris theoria sacra or the Sacred Theory of the Earth (Latin version 1681, English 1684)
⁷⁵ 1698: *A Vindication of the New Theory of the Earth*
⁷⁶ 1845: *Exposition of the Westminster Confession of Faith*
⁷⁷ 1855: this work was reviewed favorably in the *Southern Quarterly Review* of April 1856, which was edited by James Henley Thornwell.
⁷⁸ 1856: of this work Charles Haddon Spurgeon said, “We do not hesitate to designate this volume as the most complete examination of the literature and the exegesis of the Creation and the Fall which has appeared in England” (*Commenting and Commentaries*, Banner of Truth reprint ed., 1969, p. 53).
⁷⁹ J. Gresham Machen, *The Christian View of Man* (Edinburgh and Carlisle, Pa.: Banner of Truth, 1965), pp. 115-116 (or New York: Macmillan, 1937, or Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1947, pp. 130-131): “It is certainly not necessary to think that the six days spoken of in that first chapter of the Bible are intended to be six days of twenty-four hours each. We may think of them rather as very long periods of time.”
⁸⁰ Oswald T. Allis, *God spake by Moses* (Nutley, N.J.: Presbyterian and reformed 1958), pp. 10-11: “We cannot be sure, and must not be dogmatic...concerning the length of the days of creation.”
⁸¹ Edward J. Young, *Studies in Genesis One* (Phillipsburg, N.J.: Presbyterian and Reformed, 1964, 1999), pp. 102-104: “The Bible does not say how old the earth is...” and “The length of the days is not stated.”
⁸² 1962, *A Systematic Theology of the Christian Religion*, Vol. I, pp. 139-162.

<a id="ga28-p158"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=160 printed_page=158 -->

In his three-volume Commentary on Genesis, James Montgomery Boice considers evolution, theistic evolution, the gap theory, six-day creationism, and progressive creationism in chapters 5 through 9 of Volume $1^{85}$ and concludes by favoring a Day-Age view. $^{86}$

## 4. Is the Day-Age interpretation just a reaction to Darwinism?

Much of the negative sentiment brought against the Day-Age theory of creation within the reformed church has been engendered by a strong reaction against the teachings which grew out of Charles Darwin’s seminal work on the “Origin of Species.” In its so-called neo-Darwinian form, this teaching holds that random mutations, which are continually occurring within the population gene pool of any species, can confer a survival advantage on individuals within the species, and that gradually over long periods of time, this increased biological fitness leads to the emergence of new species with more complex biological systems, through an unguided process termed ‘Darwinian Evolution.’ Extension of this concept back in time to an initial primordial elemental soup (which arose some time after the ‘Big Bang’$^{87}$) that gave rise to the first ‘life’, has substituted for the Biblical account of creation in the proud minds of men. This view has been so aggressively taught within our schools and colleges that it is the predominant view of the origins and diversity of life. Consequently, we in the church today find ourselves in such a reactionary stance against this incessant tide of unsubstantiated indoctrination of our children, that we ‘blame’ Darwinian evolution as the evil that gave rise to such interpretations of the Genesis account of creation as the Day-Age theory. This is not so, however, as we can clearly appreciate from the discussion under question 3) above where we see that a view open to the possibility of creative days of unspecified length was held by prominent and influential church fathers, some of whom lived long before Charles Darwin. We must remember this in our new examination of the theory and remain clear-headed in our evaluation of how these early, as well as contemporary, church fathers adopted the view as their belief. We must also deal with Darwinian evolution rationally and provide a cogent case for its deception and the complete lack of physical evidence to substantiate it.

## 5. How do you deal with the issue of death within this view?

The specific point for consideration here is whether death within the animal kingdom is linked to the death of Adam. Some hold the view that prior to the fall and the resultant curses by God, the perfect state of the world and everything in it left no place for death of any kind. The proponents of this view understand Romans 5:12 (“Therefore, just as sin entered the world through one man, and death through sin...”) to

$^{85}$ 1971, *Man, God’s Eternal Creation*, p. 47.

$^{84}$ 1972, *Genesis in Space and Time*, p. 39: 1975, *No Final Conflict*, p. 134.

$^{85}$ 1982, 1998, *Genesis, Grand Rapids: Baker*.

$^{86}$ Vol. I, pp. 78-79 in the 1998 edition: Vol. I, p. 68 in the 1982 edition.

$^{87}$ The cosmological theory known as the ‘Big Bang’ states that the entire Universe—including matter, energy, space and time—all came into being from an infinitesimally small point in a gigantic explosion about 15 billion years ago.

<a id="ga28-p159"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=161 printed_page=159 -->

bespeaking of all death, both that of man and all under man’s dominion, entering God’s
perfect creation through the ones in of Adam. It is clear that death at least in the plant
kingdom was to be a natural process since God gave every green plant as food to all that
had the breath of life in it including man, the beasts of the earth, the birds of the air and
all the creatures that move on the ground (Gen 1:29-30). Others, including John Murray
in his commentary,88 understand paul hereto bespeaking of the death of man only
Such proponents see in the very contrast made by Paul in Romans 5:12-21,89 of death
through Adam being subjugated by life through Christ, that the righteousness and
eternal life brought by Christ to man alone indicates through its very antithesis that
death through Adam is to man alone

those who fall into this latter category suppose that the carnivorous fish of the
ocean, which were created on the fifth day (a day before man and therefore the earliest
opportunity for the fall), ate other fish and/or birds between their creation and the fall,
just as they do today. The alternatives are that either they did not eat during this period
or that they ate only plant material before the fall (which would require a completely
different digestive system and tooth structure, for example). In addition, proponents of
this view believe the carnivorous animals, created on day six prior to man, fed in the
way they are expertly designed to do on other animals, in the manner we observe them
doing today between their creation and the fall, which (if, as some believe, the fall
occurred on day six) must have been at the very least several hours in duration to allow
time for adam to work and take care of the garden, name the kinds, sleep while God
created Eve, interact with the serpent, eat the forbidden fruit, hide from God, speak with
God, and receive the judgements and curses.

a biblical text associated with the account of the fall has also caused some to
ponder the timing of death in the animal kingdom. Immediately after the fall, God
graciously made garments of skin— probably animal hides (Gen 3:21)— to clothe Adam

88 An Epistle to the Romans, 2 vols. (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1959, 1968), 1 178-191,
especially p. 191, n. 23.
89 Therefore, just as sin entered the world through one man, and death through sin, and in this
way death came to all men, because all sinned— 13 for before the law was given, sin was in the world
But sin is not taken into account when there is no law. 14 Nevertheless, death reigned from the time of
Adam to the time of Moses, even over those who did not sin by breaking a command, as did Adam, who
was a pattern of the one to come. 15 But the gift is not like the trespass. For if the many died by the
trespass of the one man, how much more did God’s grace and the gift that came by the grace of the one
man, Jesus Christ, overflow to the many! 15 Again, the gift of God is not like the result of the one man's
sin: The judgment followed one sin and brought condemnation, but the gift followed many trespasses and
brought justification. 17 For if, by the trespass of the one man, death reigned through that one man, how
much more will those who receive God’s abundant provision of grace and of the gift of righteousness
reign in life through the one man, Jesus Christ. 18 Consequently, just as the result of one trespass was
condemnation for all men, so also the result of one act of righteousness was justification that brings life
for all men. 19 for just as through the disobedience of the one man them any we remade sinners, so also
through the obedience of the one man the many will be made righteous. 20 The law was added so that the
trespass might increase. But where sin increased, grace increased all the more, 21 so that, just as sin
reigned in death, so also grace might reign through righteousness to bring eternal life through Jesus Christ
our Lord (Romans 5:12-21).

<a id="ga28-p160"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=162 printed_page=160 -->

and his wife to cover their shame. While the exact timing of the sequence of events leading up to God’s gift of clothes to Adam and Eve is not given, it seems certain that the dialogue between God and Adam was on the same day as God was walking in the garden. Furthermore, it seems most likely that God’s judgements and curses were uttered immediately upon Adam’s admission of guilt, and that God clothed them with the animal hides at the same time to complete His dealings with them. The question then arises as to the time that the skin was taken from the animals and processed into leather hides that the Lord God used to make the garments. Could it be that animals had already been killed by other animals or man for food, or slaughtered for hides that may have been used for bedding and baskets for carrying things, for example?

6. How do you deal with the issue of time within this view?

Much could be said in response to this question since it is inherent in the title of the theory under discussion (Day-Age) and at the very heart of the reason why the committee is meeting. First we are told that God is from eternity past,⁹⁰ from everlasting to everlasting,⁹¹ an eternal God.⁹² Time itself was a part of His creation. Time, as Herman Bavinck⁹³ expressed it, “is the measure of creaturely existence.” What he terms ‘intrinsic time’ is “a mode of existence of all created and finite beings.” By ‘extrinsic time’ he means “the standard employed to measure motion... We derive it from the motion of the heavenly bodies, which is constantly and universally known, Gen 1:14ff.” It is this ‘extrinsic time,’ time as we know and measure it, which has its beginning only on the fourth day when we are told:

And God said, “Let there be lights in the expanse of the sky to separate the day from the night, and let them serve as signs to mark seasons and days and years” (Gen 1:14).

On the other hand, ‘intrinsic time,’ the possibility for beginning, end, and sequence of events, comes into existence with the beginning of creation. The Lord is sovereign and not part of His creation; He is outside of it and therefore outside of our perception of time (and space). Inasmuch as God created the space we know (the heavens and the earth on day 1) before He constituted our natural measure and knowledge of time (on day 4), it seems logical to conclude that He at least began His creation in His own sense of “time.” Perhaps the Lord is trying to communicate this to us through the psalmist in the Old Testament (Ps 90:4) and Peter in the New Testament (2 Peter 3:8) when we are told that “With the Lord a day is like a thousand years, and a thousand years are like a day.” In other words, our perception of time is not the Lord’s.

If this is the case, are we being presumptuous, or even arrogant imposing the time we know on the Lord for His creative work? For our sake, so that we might know

⁹⁰ Ps 93:2.
⁹¹ Neh 9:5; Ps 90:2.
⁹² Gen 21:33; Deu 33:27; Isa 26:4; Jer 10:10; Rom 16:26; 1 Tim 1:17; Heb 9:14.
⁹³ Herman Bavinck, The Doctrine of God, trans. William Hendricksen, Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1951, pp. 154-157.

<a id="ga28-p161"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=163 printed_page=161 -->

that He undertook His creative work in six discrete steps of “time”, He gives the refrain “And there was evening, and there was morning—the nth day.” Even the order of the two times of day in the refrain is peculiar from our perception of time and work; they bracket the nighttime. We characteristically work during the daytime, and so if we were writing such a refrain describing our creative work it would be far more logical to write, “And there was morning and there was evening—the nth day.” So even this refrain hints at something unusual about the time of creation, that may have been designed for us to notice.

## 7. What are the strengths of the Day-Age interpretation?

a. This view is not concerned with the absolute period of time God used in each of His six days of creation. It recognizes this period in earth’s ‘history’ as special when time, as it has been given to us (and space), was created. In as much as this creative event appeared to have occurred on the fourth ‘day,’ this view prefers not to stipulate periods of man’s perception of time for the first three days, since the Sovereign Creator of them is Himself outside of them. It also acknowledges that the Creator may have used the process of growth⁹⁴ for example, as we now perceive growth, a “time-consuming” activity, to bring forth vegetation. In addition, the ‘days’ (ages) within the Day-Age model, can be overlapping to allow insects and birds to be created in time to facilitate plant reproduction, when plants had grown to reproductive age.

b. This view does not need to consider the so-called ‘appearance of age’ problem; that God might have created things differently from how we perceive the order of nature (general revelation⁹⁵) today from the present interpretations of the findings of science. e.g. that the speed of light has changed; that carnivorous animals and fish were once herbivorous; that stars were created with strings of light attached; that rocks were created with isotope ratios suggesting age; that fossils were created with the appearance of age; that fossils, have apparently different ages with some of them being very old.

c. The Day-Age construct preserves the general sequence of events as portrayed in the text.

d. The position can, and has been, arrived at through exegesis of the text, particularly what is said about the sun on the fourth day and what is said about growth and development in Genesis 2 and does not require the influence of Darwinian evolutionists, or any of the natural sciences.

e. The position accounts for the description of the events on the fourth day, including the beginning of solar days, and no non-literal explanation of the text dealing with this creation is called for. Neither do we have to impose solar days on days 1-3 of creation before the sun was in existence.

⁹⁴ Gen 2:5, 9
⁹⁵ See the section of the Committee’s report dealing with General Revelation.

<a id="ga28-p162"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=164 printed_page=162 -->

f. This viewpoint readily accommodates the preponderance of inference from present day scientific interpretation from general revelation, in particular with data from astrophysics, geology and the fossil record.

g. The time that might be envisioned for the accomplishment of the extensive list of events that occur on the sixth day of creation present no problem to this view. On this day the wild animals, the livestock and all the creatures that move along the ground were created. Then Adam was created and put in the Garden of Eden to take care of it with the single proviso that he was not to eat from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. Then the Lord brought all the beasts of the field and all the birds of the air before Adam for the man to name them, but from amongst them no suitable helper was found. So the Lord caused Adam to fall into a deep sleep, took a rib from him and created Eve to be his wife and helper. Some would also include in the events of this day, the dealings of Eve with the serpent, the eating by Adam and Eve of the forbidden fruit, their sewing of fig leaves to make coverings for themselves after the realization of their nakedness, their hiding from the Lord and then accounting to Him of their sin, the Lord's cursing of the serpent, the man and woman and the ground, the Lord's fashioning garments of skin for the man and the woman to clothe them, and then banishing them from the Garden of Eden.

## 8. What are the difficulties for the Day-Age interpretation?

a. Without the concept of ‘age overlap,’ it allows that the universe as we know it could have existed in intermediate states for long periods of time, e.g. vegetation requiring insects/birds for propagation to be in existence without insects/birds.

b. Overlapping ‘days’ (ages) are hard to propose from a reading of the text which more speaks of consecutive times (days).

c. Green plants were created on day 3. Although light had been created on day 1, we know nothing about the nature of this light and its ability to substitute for sunlight (not available until day 4) as the energy source for the plant life. Thus, it could be argued that the green plants could not exist for a very long period without the sun.

d. Need to accept that at least the initial creatures of every species were created by God with some appearance of age (since this view affirms that there was a primary creation event of all species of plants, animals and man “each according to its kind” [Gen 1:24]).

## C. The Framework Interpretation

### Description

There are a number of versions of the Framework interpretation. Here we discuss the position which has arguably influenced the PCA most, that of Meredith G. Kline and Mark D. Futato.⁹⁶ In Genesis 1:1-2:3:

⁹⁶For our purposes the positions of Kline and Futato are the same. See Kline, "Because It Had Not Rained," Westminster Theological Journal 20 (1958) 146-57; “Genesis,” New Bible Commentary:

<a id="ga28-p163"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=165 printed_page=163 -->

exegesis indicates that the scheme of the creation week itself is a poetic
figure and that the several pictures of creation history a reset within the
six work-day frames not chronologically but topically. In distinguishing
simple description and poetic figure from what is definitively conceptual
the only ultimate guide, here as always, is comparison with the rest of
Scripture.97

In other words, the distinctive feature of the framework interpretation is its
understanding of the week (not the days as such) as a metaphor 98 Moses used the
metaphor of a week to narrate God’s acts of creation. Thus God’s supernatural creative
words or fiats are real and historical, but the exact timing is left unspecified.

Why the week then7 Moses intended to show Israel God’s call to Adam to
imitate Him in work, with the promise of entering his sabbath rest. God’s week is a
model, analogous to Israel’s week. the events a regrouped in two triads of days. Days
1-3 (creation’s kingdoms) are paralleled by Days 4-6 (creation’s kings). Adam is king
of the earth and god is king of Creation.99

Two major arguments support the position:

1. the order of gen 1 is difficult to square with Gen 2:5-6: “and no plant of the
field was yet in the earth, and no herb of the field had yet sprung up, for the LORD God
had not caused it to rain on the earth, and there was no man to till the ground.” These
verses presuppose that God’s preservation of the plants during the six days was by
normal, secondary causes (water), not by miracle. What Scripture presupposes is part
of its inspired meaning.100 Without rain or a human cultivator, God would not create
plants. Verse 5's explanation forth is assumes that the mode of preservation during the
creation period was ordinary preservation (the same as the Israelite knows, what is
currently operating).101

Revised (Grand Rapids: William B. Eerdmans. 1970); with development of his themes, “Space and Time
in the Genesis Cosmogony.” Perspectives on Science and Christian Faith 48 (19%) 2-15; Lee Irons with
Meredith G. Kline, “The Framework Interpretation.” in the forthcoming volume edited by D. Hagopian;
Mark D. Futato, “Because It Had Rained: a study of gen 2:5-7 With Implications for Gen 2:4-25 and
Gen 1:1-2:3,” Westminster Theological Journal 60 (1998) 1-21. Other presentations of the framework
Mew will be noted below.
97“Genesis” 82.
98Hence “ydm " is understood in its normal sense.
" “Genesis” 82-83.
100“The whole counsel of God . . . is either expressly set down in Scripture, or by good and
necessary consequence may be deduced from Scripture . . ” WCF 1:6.
10l“God in his ordinary providence maketh use of means, yet is free to work without, above and
against them.” WCF 5:3. Of course, even normal preservation presupposes God’s nearness and activity.
“All the second causes owe their potency to Him, and the whole system is effective only because of his
indwelling power.” Donald Macleod Behold Your God (Tain: Christian Focus, 1990) 50. For example,
God causes it to rain.

<a id="ga28-p164"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=166 printed_page=164 -->

but normal preservation cannot be easily harmonized with a week of 144 hours.
If Gen 1 is strictly sequential, Gen 2:5 must have occurred on Day 3, because dry land
did not exist before Day 3, and rich vegetation existed by the end of day 3 But when
Gen 2:5 occurred, it was too dry for plants. Land inundated with water only yesterday
(Day 2) does not dry out in a few hours, especially without the sun, which was not
created until Day 4 God could have preserved plants without rain, man, or the sun But
that is not the way Gen 2:5 explains the delay of the creation of plants. Rather it was
because of the lack of water, or secondary means of preservation therefore the six
days in Gen 1 must be topical, not sequential The framework view does not state how
long the week was, but affirms that it must have been longer than one hundred fortyfour hours.
2. Second, since God’s mode of operation was ordinary providence, and since light
(Day one) without luminaries (Day four) is not ordinary providence, the six days of
creation in Gen 1 must be topical, not sequential

Futato’s version of the Framework view argues that both Gen 1 and 2 are
arranged topically. Moses wrote in the second millennium B.C. for the edification of
the israelite son the outskirts of the land of canaan the basic message of gen 1 is that
Yahweh, the god of the Exodus, not Baal, is the creator of heaven an dearth he
brought them into being by his Sovereign Word. They depend on him completely.
Yahweh is God over rain and sun, moon and stars, hence they are not to be worshiped.

As mentioned above, there are variations on the framework theme. Kline has
recently added a “two-register cosmology,” in further development of his earlier
framework conclusions.102 Bruce Waltke summarizes his own reflections on the literary
genre of the passage:

. . it is a literary-artistic representation of the creation to this we add
the purpose, namely, to ground the covenant people’s worship and life in
the Creator, who transformed chaos into cosmos, and their ethics in his
creative order

Henri Blocher basically follows Kline. Gordon J. Wenham seems less clear about the
historical claim of the text. We move into a different realm with Claus Westermann,
who is driven by higher-critical commitments.103

Note also that it is preservation that is said to be by second causes, not the creative words by
which He called the creatures into being. Kline writes, “Acts of supernatural origination did initiate and
punctuate the creation process.” “Space” 13.
102"Space.” This material would involve a separate analysis, beyond the scope of this report
103Bruce K. Waltke. “The Literary Genre of Genesis. Chapter One.” Crux 27 (1991) 9; H
Blocher. In the Beginning, the opening chapters of Genesis. Downers Grove: Inter-Varsity, 1984; M.
W. Poole and G.J. Wenham. Creation or Evolution: A False Antithesis? (Oxford: Latimer House. 1987);
Claus Westermann, Genesis 1-11: A Commentary. Minneapolis: Augsburg. 1984 (Happily, we have
never met a PCA candidate who followed Westermann )

<a id="ga28-p165"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=167 printed_page=165 -->

Comparison of the Framework Interpretation with Other Interpretations
The Framework position as taught by Kline and Futato shares a number of
conclusions with the Calendar-Day, Day-Age, and Analogical-Day interpretations.

1 It teaches that Gen 1 is inspired verbal revelation. It teaches creation from
nothing, the special creation of adam and Eve, adam as the covenant head of the race,
and death and curse as the result of sin.

2. it affirms the historic i ty of Adam, his uniqueness as the image of God, and his
covenant heads hip of the human race.104

3. Along with the Calendar-Day view, it understands yom, day, to refer to a regular
day.

4 With the Analogical-Day view, it says the days are structured to give a pattern
for our own work and rest. Also with the Analogical-Day view, it says that Gen 1 does
not intend to communicate the length of the creation week

5 With the Day-Age view, but differing from the Calendar-Day view, it holds that
the length of the creation period is figurative. The Framework view differs from the
Day-Age view in that it does not understand yom , day, as along period of time it
differs with the Calendar Day, Analogical-Day, and Day-Age views by denying that
Moses intended to relate the creation history sequentially.

Evaluation

Strengths
1 The Framework view interprets Gen 1 in the light of its immediate context in
Gen 2 105 It harmonizes Gen 1 and 2 concretely and contextually. It tries to attend to the
Bible’s actual meaning within the ancient Near Eastern readership. This is particularly
true of Futato’s stress on the literary features of the text.106 Moses’ audience in Genesis
was ancient Israel. To whatever extent he wrote to challenge paganism, his arrows were

IMCommenting on Gen 2:7 Kline writes, “The creature thus animated was not previously alive
and it was nothing short of man, the image of God, that now by this immediate divine action first became
a living being (cf. 1 Cor 15:45).” “Genesis” 83.
105All interpreters admit the need to explain differences in the arrangement of material in Gen 1
and Gen 2. The Westminster Confession gives us this principle: “The infallible rule of interpretation of
Scripture, is the Scripture itself; and therefore, when there is a question about the true and full sense of
any scripture (which is not manifold, but one), it may be searched and known by other places that speak
more clearly” WCF 1:9. The Framework view accounts for the time-markers (“evening,” “morning."
“first day.” etc.) of the passage by appealing to thematic concerns in Moses' composition. This is
consistent with the Genesis narrative. Thematic organization and recapitulation are present in Genesis
2:4-4:26 and Genesis 5 :1-6 6, both of which are accounts of human history from creation to the flood, but
from different perspectives Gen 2:4-4:26 narrates the history of the godly line from creation to Noah.
Gen 5:1-6:6 relates that same span of history, from creation to the flood, in terms of the ungodly family of
Cain. Moses recapitulates the same history from different perspectives.
'“ “Because” 20.

<a id="ga28-p166"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=168 printed_page=166 -->

aimed at ancient Baal religion, not at modern naturalistic astronomy, biology, or
geology. He wrote to strengthen the covenant people as they entered Canaan. However
much we may diverge in exegetical conclusions, and granting that metaphor is less
descriptively precise than prose, we may agree that for Israel, a technical scientific
description of the timing and mechanisms of creation was not the primary focus of
Genesis 1. Nevertheless, the Creator’s week is not window dressing, but a call to
covenant obedience.

2. The view is fully compatible with the New Testament which emphasizes God’s
word of power and the created order, not the timing or length of creation. Specifically,
it is compatible with Heb 4:4-6, which presents Gen 2:2, the 7th day, God’s creation
rest, as the consummation hope of the church. (See the Appendix, “The New
Testament’s view of the historic i ty of genesis 1-3")

3. The Framework view is theologically rich, highlighting Moses’ presentation of
biblical-theological themes such as covenant, image of God, and Sabbath. The literary
schema of days illumines the glorious wisdom of god as the sovereign architect of
creation, and the goal of all things.

4. with respect to the relation of scientific theory and theology it is open to the
study of general revelation regarding the age of the earth and the cosmos, within
biblical constraints.107 some of those are: creation ex nihilo, that Adam and Eve were
the genetically unique, specially created parents of the human race, and that the fall of
Adam introduced the curse into God’s good creation. It denies all evolutionary origins,
and evolutionary philosophy as contradictory to the teaching of scripture.108

Objections
1. The position has been severely criticized for rendering Gen 1 non-historical
For example:

Evangelical framework theologians tell us that the Genesis account is
not a factual and historical account. Rather, it is an artistic expression, a
divine metaphor, affirming that God is the Creator, it does not inform us
either of the mechanism or time frame of the creative process.109

107Though many of its proponents hold an old-earth position, the Framework interpretation is
silent on the age of the earth. It can be held compatibly with a young or an old earth. of course by its
nature as special revelation. Scripture focuses and constrains the conclusions of the stud)- of general
revelation.
10*Kline writes, “Paul understood this record of the woman's origins as straightforward history .
. . Following that direction in the exegesis of Gen 2:7 particularly, we find ourselves led away from any
theoretical reconstruction in which the creative act that produced Adam is attached organically to some
prior life process evolving at a sub-human level.” “Genesis” 84,
109The Counsel ofChalcedon, November 1998, 5.

<a id="ga28-p167"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=169 printed_page=167 -->

The criticism is a serious one, because christianity rests on the historic i ty of gen 1-3.
However, Framework proponent Meredith Kline explicitly affirms the opposite. He
writes,

. . Gen 1-11 is not mythological but a genuine record of history. . The
material in these chapters is unquestionably interpreted by inspired
writers elsewhere in Scripture as historical in the same sense that they
understand Gen 12-50 or Kings or the Gospels to be historical.110

this avowal of historic i ty maybe highlighted by contrasting it with the comment of
Roman Catholic scholar J. A. Fitzmyer on Rom 5:12: . Paul has historicized the
symbolic adam of Genesis.” 111 So the position should not be confused with the claim
that Gen 1:1-2:3 is myth or parable or allegory. The Framework position asserts
unequivocally that the passage teaches acts of supernatural origination by g od’s
commands and the special creation of adam and Eve. It is an exegesis, not an attempt
to balance prior philosophical or scientific commitments with Scripture. (Those who
hold the Framework interpretation agree that God could create the world in one hundred
forty-four hours, for instance.) because we believe in the inerrancy of Scripture, no one
should be considered orthodox who holds to the Framework view if he is motivated by
naturalistic, higher-critical, or evolutionisitic assumptions. Those assumptions would
bean abuse rather than a proper use of the framework position.112

Affirming historicity while denying sequence is difficult. The most prominent
aspect of narrative as we write it may bethe appearance of chronology. the marker of
history in our thinking tends to be “when and how did it happen?” On the surface it
seems contradictory to suggest that history is being narrated in a semi-figurative form,
when time markers are said to be figurative. This opens the interpretation to the abuse
of those who wish to deny the historic i ty of the events, or embrace naturalistic theories
of origins, a serious abuse indeed.

2. the position depends on the exegesis of gen 2:5-6 that denies all miraculous
preservation during the creation week. If there were also supernatural preservation, Gen
2:5-6 would not require a non-sequential interpretation of chapter 1. Is mere natural
preservation so clearly assumed in Gen 2:5-6 as to require the affirmation that the week
of gen 1 is a metaphor? Could God not have dried the land supematurally before the
situation described in Gen 2:5? If so, would that render the reason given in Gen 2:5b
irrelevant, as Kline claims?

""“Genesis” 79.
111Romans, A New Translation with Introduction and Commentary, Anchor Bible, vol. 33, (NY:
Doubleday, 1993)408.
112As presbyters we have the responsibility to inquire into a man's motives for a position. But
suspicions notwithstanding no one can prove the motives of his heart. Love requires us to take a man at
his word.

<a id="ga28-p168"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=170 printed_page=168 -->

3. the relation of exodus 20:11 to Genesis 1:1-2:3 raises another problem. Verse
11, “for in six days the LORD made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them is,
and rested the seventh,” employs an “accusative of duration.” In other words, critics
argue, Ex 20:11 gives an inspired interpretation of the length of the work of creation.
This is decisive for many. Those who hold the Framework position answer by noting
that the revealed pattern of six an done is a sufficient basis for man’s imitation of god
in ordering his time. That is, the rest God requires in the fourth commandment
(including physical rest) is an analogy of God’s seventh-day rest. God’s divine
refreshment on the seventh day (cf. Ex 31:17) is the theological basis of Israel’s
physical refreshment.

4. the framework interpretation raises the question of what literary genre we may
understand Gen 1 to be. It seems to present a mixed form, which is difficult to
interpret.113 How does one discern metaphor from straightforward prose? Proponents
answer that this is no more difficult in Gen 1 than anywhere else Scripture uses
metaphor. Is 48:13 says for example, “My own hand laid the foundations of the earth,
and my right hand spread out the heavens. .

The metaphors (“hand,” “foundations,” “spread out”) offer no difficulty. They do not
threaten the historical claim of the text, or the clarity of Scripture. In Gen 1 as
elsewhere, the analogy of Scripture, in its narrower and broader contexts, is
determinative.

5. The view is complex and has been poorly, perhaps sometimes provocatively
expressed. It may legitimately be asked whether the Israelite reader could have
understood the week as a metaphor without denying its real historicity.

6. the framework view is the most easily misunderstood of the options.
Proponents should recognize that it is complex, it has sometimes been poorly expressed,

113Scholars have noted that Gen 1:1-2:3, if less than poetry is more than normal prose. R. E.
Longacre of the Wycliffe Bible Translators noted to the Committee, “Nowhere else in the Hebrew Bible
do we find an actor repeatedly referred to by a noun phrase which is not reduced to anaphora carried by
the third person form of the verb. “And God did/said” occurs no less than thirty one times in chapter 1
and 2:1-3. In ordinary narrative style we would not, e.g., tell the story with multiple mention of his name:
“And Abraham did A. Then Abraham did B. Then Abraham did C. Then Abraham did D .” etc. The
sonority and dignity thus attained by repeating the name of the Divine Actor have no parallel in any other
passage of Biblical Hebrew. Furthermore, the verb “be” hayah used in its special narrative form wayehi
occurs with unusual force, while in most places the verb “be” has a lower status in narrating. Early in the
creative process God says, “Let there be light... let there be a firmament... and let there be lights.” The
fiat is exactly parallel in force to other commands such as “Let the waters be gathered together'’ and “let
dry land appear.” Each divine proposal is answered by the corresponding feature springing into being
wayehi or wayehi ken. “And it was (so).” Whether we want to call such diction and discourse structure a
poem or not is somewhat arbitrary; it is certainly unusually elevated style and probably sui generis. It is
in this context that yom day appears ringing down with a periodicity of its own alongside the divine fiats
and their responses in creation ” “Memorandum on the six days of creation (Genesis 1),” sent to the
Committee, November, 1998, emphasis his.

<a id="ga28-p169"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=171 printed_page=169 -->

and it does not answer every exegetical question. It should be handled with great
pastoral tact and sensitivity in today’s charged atmosphere.

D. The Analogical Days Interpretation
Definition of the position
1 The “days” are God’s work-days, which are analogous, and not necessarily
identical, to our work days, structured for the purpose of setting a pattern for our own
rhythm of re stand work 114

2. The six “days” represent periods of God’s historical supernatural activity in
preparing and populating the earth as a place for humans to live, love, work, and
worship,

3. These days are “broadly consecutive”: that is, they are taken as successive
periods of unspecified length, but one allows for the possibility that parts of the days
may overlap, or that there might be logical rather than chronological criteria for
grouping some events in a particular “day.”

4. Genesis 1:1-2 are background, representing an unknown length of time prior to
the beginning of the first “day”: verse 1 is the creatio ex nihilo event, while verse 2
describes the conditions of the earth as the first day commenced.

5 length of time, either for the creation week, or before it or since it, is irrelevant
to the communicative purpose of the account.

Historical background
In the modern period, this view arose from perceived problems in the Day-Age
view, though it employs what were felt to be valuable observations by the proponents of
that view. William G.T. Shedd’s Dogmatic Theology (1888), i:474-477, drew on these
insights, as well as statements from Augustine and Anselm, to the effect that the days of
Genesis 1 are “God-divided days,” with the result that “the seven days of the human
week a recopies of the seven days of the divine week.” Franz Delitzsch’s New
Commentary on Genesis appeared in English translation in 1899 (German original,
1887), and argued the same position.

the prominent dutch theologian herman bavinck published the first edition of
his Gereformeerde Dogmatiek in 1895-1901, and the second edition in 1906-1911. The
section on creation has just appeared in English translation (Baker, 1999). There he
advocates aversion of the an a logical days interpretation:

114 By “identical” is meant 24 hours long, following in direct contiguous sequence. By
“analogous” is meant that they have a point of similarity, with a basis in our experience, by which we can
understand something about God and his historical activity. See the discussion of “analogy” in the
Definitions section of this report.

<a id="ga28-p170"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=172 printed_page=170 -->

It is probable, in the first place, that the creation of heaven an dearth in
Genesis 1:1 preceded the work of the six days inverses 3ff. by a shorter
or longer period. . .

So, although. . the days of genesis 1 are to be considered days
and not to be identified with the periods of geology, they nevertheless—
like the work of creation as a whole— have an extraordinary character. .
The first three days, however much they may resemble our days, also
differ significantly from them and hence were extraordinary cosmic
days. . It is not impossible that the second triduum still shared in this
extraordinary character as well. . It is very difficult to find room on the
sixth day for everything Genesis 1-2 has occur in it if that day was in all
respects like our days. . much more took place on each day of creation
than the sober words of genesis would lead us to suspect.
For all these reasons, “day” in the first chapter of the bible denotes the
time in which God was at work creating. . The creation days are the
workdays of God.115

More recently, C. John Collins has argued for this position: first in an article in
1994,116 and then a more developed version in 1999.117 This latter article in particular
employs the tools of discourse and literary analysis. Discourse analysis approaches
text sunder the assumption that they a reacts of communication, and studies the patterns
of linguistic usage as they relate to communicative intent. Linguist and PCA ruling
elder Robert Longacre summarizes the issues studied:118

. . contemporary discourse analysis is interested in questions of genre
classification. . .; the articulation of part sofa discourses uc has
formulaic beginnings and endings, episodes, and high points in the story
(called peaks); the status of discourse constituents such as sentences,
paragraphs, and embedded discourses, the cast of participants ina given
discourse. . .; author viewpoint and author sympathy as indicated in the
text; the mainline development of a discourse. . .; the role of tense,
aspect, particles, affixes, pronominalization chains, paraphrase, and
conjunctions in providing cohesion and prominence in a discourse; ways
of marking peak ina narrative; and the function of dialogue in discourse.

115 Excerpts from Bavinck, In the Beginning (Baker, 1999), 120-126.
116 C. John Collins, “How old is the earth? Anthropomorphic days in Genesis 1:1B2:3,"
Presbyterion 20:2 (Fall, 1994), 109-130.
117 C. John Collins, “Reading Genesis 1:1B2:3 as an act of communication: Discourse analysis
and literal interpretation,” in Joseph Pipa, Jr. and David Hall, eds., Did God create in six days?, Southern
Presbyterian Press and Kuyper Institute, 1999.
"* Robert E. Longacre, “The discourse structure of the flood narrative,” in G. MacRae, ed.,
society of biblical literature 1976 Seminar Papers (Scholars, 1976), 235-262.

<a id="ga28-p171"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=173 printed_page=171 -->

conservative literary approaches share some of these concerns, and add some of their
own.119 These methods stem from the observation that the Biblical narratives are
stories, and hence involve characters, events (plot), and scenes. To call them stories is
not to downplay their historical claims (indeed, to do so would be a mis-reading of
them), instead, it directs our attention to the narrator’s ways of portraying characters’
good and bad traits, and of displaying or hiding his own point of view.

Description of the position
the specific features of the hebrew text of genesis 1:1— 2:3 (and of passages
that reflect on it) for which this interpretation (in its developed form) seeks to account
include:

1. The verb tenses in Gen 1:1-2 mark those verses as background to the narrative:
further analysis indicates that verse 1 designates an event as an unspecified time prior to
the conditions of verse 2, while verse 2 describes the conditions as the first day begins
in verse 3 (which uses the narrative tense for the first time).

2. the absence of the refrain in the seventh day is most easily explained as
indicating that the day did not end (and John 5:17, Hebrews 4:3-11 seem to take that for
granted), hence this is not an “ordinary” day.120

3 the refrain of the six days (“and there was evening, and there was morning, the
nth day”), when seen from within the culture of Moses, marks the end-points of the
night-time (cf. Numbers 9:15-16), which is the daily rest for the worker (Psalm 104:22-
23, cf. Genesis 30:16; Exodus 18:13) and looks forward to the weekly Sabbath rest.

4. When the Pentateuch reflects on this account to enjoin Sabbath observance, it
draws on the analogy (and not identity) between our work and rest and God’s (Exodus
20:8-11,31:17).

5. the use of the hebrew narrative tense and the march of the numbered days in
Genesis 1, along with the accusative of duration in exodus 20:11 (“over the course of
six days”) all favor the conclusion that the creative events were accomplished over
some stretch of time (i.e. not instantaneously), and that the days are (at least broadly)
sequential

1,9 The qualifier "conservative” designates those approaches that focus on the text having a
meaning, as opposed to the "post-modern” kind which locate meaning only in the reader or in the reader’s
interpretive community, or which deny the possibility of communication altogether.
120 the conventionality of this view can be seen in john Murray’s, principles of conduct
(Eerdmans. 1957). 30-32. As Murray says, “There is the strongest presumption in favour of the
interpretation that this seventh day is not one that terminated at a certain point in history, but that the whole
period of time subsequent to the end of the sixth day is the sabbath of rest alluded to in Genesis 2:2. . The
considerations supporting this view may be conclusive and they are regarded as such by some careful and
reverent scholars.”

<a id="ga28-p172"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=174 printed_page=172 -->

6. the indivisibility of genesis 2:4, as well as its content, points to the traditional
conclusion that Genesis 2:5-25 are an amplification only of the sixth “day” of the
creation week.

Similarities to and differences from the other positions
1 conservative adherents of the calendar day view, the Day-Age view, and the
Framework view, share a number of points in common with the Analogical Days view.
these include the propriety of attributing “historicity” to Genesis 1-3 (see discussion of
that word in the definitions section of this report), the rejection of source-critical
theories of these chapters as originally disparate, and ultimately incompatible, and
adherence to the authority of the new testament as interpreter of these chapters.

2. The Calendar Day, Day-Age, and Analogical Day views all see the days as
sequential, while the Framework view sees sequentiality as optional at best. The
Calendar Day and Day-Age views take the strongest position on sequence, while the
Analogical Days view is more reserved about strict sequentiality (and hence cautious
about harmonization with geology)121

3. With the Day-Age view, the Analogical Days view sees the days as potentially
long periods; unlike that view, it does not arrive at that position by appeal to “day” in its
sense “period of undefined length.” instead it finds an ana logical application of the
ordinary sense of the word “day .”

4. Finally, the Day-Age, Analogical Days, and Framework interpretations do not
involve rejection of conventional cosmology and geology. (The stance taken toward
evolutionary biology, a different science, is different, seethe discussion of “evolution”
in the Definitions section) although some adherents of the calendar days view do not
insist on young-earth cosmology and geology, most do

Strengths of the position
This position claims the following factors in its favor, which commend it to
others’ acceptance:

1. It derives from a discourse-oriented study of the text of scripture in the original
languages. Although it is in principle responsible to re-evaluate our interpretation of the
bible in the light of widely accepted scientific theories, it is dangerous to set out with
the purpose of harmonization. this interpretation does not fall foul of such a warning.
As an exegetical position it is compatible with old-earth creationism as well as with
young-earth creationism, but requires neither.

2. the toolkit of discourse and literary methods, when applied to the rest of
Genesis 2— 3, yield such results as: rejection of source-critical theories of the passages’

121 Bavinck calls the Day-Age view a "concordistic theory” (page 117), and he rejects it as
unsuccessful in its harmonization. On the other hand, he is not as distrustful of standard geology' and
paleontology as the young-earth adherents of the Calendar Day view tend to be.

<a id="ga28-p173"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=175 printed_page=173 -->

origin; affirmation that we do not have here two “creation accounts”, resolution of
alleged contradictions between Genesis 1 and 2 (e.g. at 2:5-6, 19); vindication of the
pauline reading of genesis 3, including Adam’s role as first human and covenant head
of humanity, and different role relationships for men and women within the context of
their equal bearing of g od’s image. application of these tools does not in anyway
question the “historicity” of the events narrated in these chapters, but in fact supports it
These methods attempt to systematize what good grammarians and exegetes through the
ages have “felt.”

3. Though the interpretive scheme itself, a swell as some of the arguments
employed for it, may sound novel to some, it does not actually involve any grammatical
or semantic innovations.

4 the developed arguments for the view claim to account for all the details of the
text.

5 This view is explicitly built on the desire to be ruled by Scriptural reflections on
the account, especially those regarding work and the Sabbath (Exodus 20:8-11; John
5:17; Hebrews 4:3-11). In particular, it is strongly Sabbatarian in its orientation, and
explains how our Sabbath can be grounded in God’s by the principle of analogy.

6. the stress on the principle of analogy between God’s work and ours means that
it has special creative events built into it, and hence while it favors some sort of
intelligent design model for biology it is incompatible with theistic evolutionary
schemes.

Objections to the position
The following objections may be raised to this interpretation, which advocates
must be sure to answer:

1 The discourse and literary methods to which it appeals are new, and not
unanimously or consistently employed by Bible scholars.

2. The scheme requires explanation to show that it is not too subtle for the ordinary
Hebrew to have understood it, or for the ordinary believer today to understand it.

3 other explanations for the absence of the refrain on the seventh day have been
offered by responsible commentators, and need to be considered.

4 No other Scriptural examples are offered where time indicators are used
analogically.

5 though it may claim a kind of continuity with augustine (as well as Anselm,
and sympathy from Aquinas), it is not really the same as his instantaneous creation
view. Hence its continuity may be said to be selective

<a id="ga28-p174"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=176 printed_page=174 -->

E. Other Interpretations of the Creation Days
There are other interpretive schemes that are probably represented in the PCA,
but are not represented on the Study Committee. We willsummarize them briefly.

1. The “intermittent day” interpretation
in this scheme the days are calendar days of creative activity, separated by
periods of unspecified length. That is, the days are “normal,” and consecutive, but not
contiguous.

This view is chiefly associated with Robert Newman and Herman Eckelmann,
Jr., genesis one and the origin of the earth (Inter Varsity, 1977).122

the strength of this view is that it aims to leave the days as ordinary ones while
pursuing a high level of concordance with scientific conclusions (except evolutionary
ones, which its advocates reject).

among its weaknesses would bethe lack of textual indicators for the intervening
spaces, a swell a sits intentionally high level of harmonization with modern scientific
results with little relevance for the ancient audience.

2. The “gap” (or “reconstitution”) interpretation
This scheme sees the “creation week” of genesis 1:1— 2:3 as describing the re
making of the earth after a primeval rebellion had spoiled it. It reads Genesis 1:2 as
“and the earth became formless and void,” a condition which it attributes to this
rebellion.

This has been associated with such figures as Thomas Chalmers (as early as
1814), Arthur Custance, and the Scofield Reference Bible (including the new
edition).123 The Scofield Bible combines this with a day-age interpretation of the days.

It is argued that this scheme allows geology to tell us that the earth is old, and
that the fossils represent old animals, at the same time as it takes the “days” as calendar
days. (As indicated, the Scofield position would not endorse this last part.)

its chief weakness is the grammar of genesis 1:2: it is hard to see how the
construction can be interpreted as “and the earth became,” both because of the verb
tense and the absence of the normal idiom for “become.”

122 The English theologian William Ames (Medulla theologica, 1634) has been adduced as an
advocate of this view (by J. mac p her son in the confession of Faith, 1882); and though the Latin can bear
this interpretation, Macpherson’s reading has not gone undisputed.
123 See also Edward Hitchcock, the religion of geology and its connected sciences (1854). This
book is reviewed in Southern Quarterly Review 1:1 (April, 1856), 21-50, and a major criticism of it is the
requirement for 24-hour days

<a id="ga28-p175"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=177 printed_page=175 -->

3. The “days of revelation” interpretation
The days are six consecutive 24-hour days in which God revealed the narrative
to Moses. This is associated with the British soldier and diplomat P. J. Wiseman,
Creation Revealed in Six Days (1958), and his son, the well-respected Assyriologist
Donald J. Wiseman, in “Creation time — what does Genesis say?,” Science and
christian belie f3:1 (1991), 25-34.

4. The “days of divine fiat” interpretation
This view asserts that the days are six consecutive 24-hour days in which God
said his instructions, while the fulfillment of those instructions took place over
unspecified periods of time. This view appears in Alan Hayward’s Creation and
Evolution (Bethany, 1995 [originally 1985]). Hayward is a progressive creationist who
makes a strong and responsible case against Darwinism.

5. The “focus on Palestine” interpretation
This view sees creation as restricted to Genesis 1:1 and argues that the account
shifts in Genesis 1:2 to a description of the preparation of the promised land for Israel.
This view comes from John Sailhamer, Genesis Unbound (Multnomah, 1996).124

6. Expanding time
This view is connected with the Israeli physicist Gerald Schroeder. Schroeder
propounds his position in his books genesis and the big bang and the science of
God.125 First, he contends that since the Jewish calendar begins with Adam, we may
take the six creation days as separate from this clock. Second, he employs Einstein’s
relativity theory, under the assumption that the six “days” are days from a different
frame of reference than ours on earth, namely from the initial Big Bang (from our frame
of reference, the universe is 15 billion years old).

Under this scheme, the first day is 24 hours from the “beginning of time
perspective,” and 8 billion years from ours. The second day, 24 hours from the
beginning of time perspective, was 4 billion years long from ours. The third day from
our vantage point was 2 billion years, the fourth day one billion years, the fifth day half
a billion, and the sixth day was a quarter billion years long.

To Schroeder’s delight, this adds up to 15.75 billion years, the same as the
modern cosmologists’ calculation.

the appeal of this view is that it does not need another meaning for “day,” and
at the same time harmonizes with modem cosmology. The exegetical difficulty is that
it requires a vantage point other than that of earth, which the Genesis account seems to

124 A 19th century version of a “focus-on-a-specific-land” interpretation is found in Milton Terry,
Biblical Hermeneutics, 548-552.
125 This description is summarized from Schroeder’s article, “The age of the universe”
(http: //members.xoom. com/XOOM/torahscience/bigbang 1. htm).

<a id="ga28-p176"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=178 printed_page=176 -->

presuppose. Philosophically, it must justify its strong impulse toward harmonization (see the discussion of “harmonization” in the Definitions section).

## V. Original Intent of the Westminster Assembly

The Westminster Confession of Faith 4:1 says,

It pleased God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, for the manifestation of the glory of his eternal power, wisdom, and goodness, in the beginning, to create, or make of nothing, the world, and all things therein, whether visible or invisible, in the space of six days; and all very good.¹²⁶

What did the Westminster Assembly mean by the phrase “in the space of six days?” Without casting a shadow over the good intentions of anyone, we would remind the Church that these are not ideal circumstances for an unbiased, balanced interpretation. This study has arisen in theological controversy B which frequently in history has been the matrix for theological definition. The interpretation of this phrase has received more attention in the last three years than in the previous three-hundred-fifty. No doubt, more light will be shed on the phrase as research continues. In the meantime we should all exercise mutual love and due caution in drawing conclusions.

The Committee agrees on a number of facts bearing on the original intent of the Assembly. These are listed as follows:

- The doctrine of creation is of integral importance to the theology of the Standards.
- The discussion of the length of creation days held by the Assembly was not in the context of the variety of interpretations of Genesis 1 available today.
- Throughout the ages of its history, the church has wrestled with the theological implications of the existence of light before Day 4. This may have given rise to the statement of William Perkins, of great influence on that generation of Puritanism, who wrote, “six distinct days,” or “six distinct spaces of time.”¹²⁷
- Throughout pre-Reformation history Augustine’s instantaneous creation view was treated with respect, and, while not adopted by a majority, was never considered heretical.¹²⁸
- John Calvin employed the phrase “the space of six days” (sex dierum spatium) in order to counter Augustine’s instantaneous creation view. The Westminster

¹²⁶ By implication we include Larger Catechism 15 and Shorter Catechism 9, which are not substantially different from Confession of Faith 4:1.

¹²⁷ William Perkins, “Exposition of … The Creede,” Works, 3 Volumes (London, 1612) 1:143.

¹²⁸ Herman Bavinck, In the Beginning, Foundations of Creation Theology (English translation, Grand Rapids: Baker, 1999) 106.

<a id="ga28-p177"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=179 printed_page=177 -->

Assembly by adopting this phrase excluded Augustine’s instantaneous creation
view.

■ the influence of the irish articles of 1615 and their primary author James Ussher on
the Assembly was very important. the first confessional use of "the space of six
days" is found in the Irish Articles.
■ the confession of faith 4:1, Larger Catechism 15, and Shorter Catechism 9 use the
phrase “in the space of six days” without further specification.

■ At least five divines affirmed the Calendar Day view, possibly more. No evidence
has been found of any view other than the calendar day in the writings of
individual divines.
■ Among Calendar Day advocates among the divines, there were differences on other
related matters, e g , the length of the first day, the time of year of the creation of
Adam, the time of the fall of Adam, and the time of the fall of the angels.

■ In interpreting the Standards, as in interpreting Scripture, historical and literary
context must be observed as the most important indication of meaning Thus, as
we seek to understand the original intent of the westminster confession and
Catechisms regarding creation, it is imperative that we consider the historical
time in which those documents were prepared. They were composed by the
Westminster Assembly, which met between 1643 and 1649. (The task of
drafting Chapter 4 of the confession was assigned july 16, 1645. The Assembly
debated and concluded this chapter on November 18-20, 1645.)

Three Interpretations of the Original Intent of the Westminster Standards
As we considered these facts, three interpretations have presented themselves
to some of us, the evidence leads to the conclusion that the Assembly meant “six
calendar days.” to others of us, the evidence is not strong enough to conclude that the
assembly wished to exclude any view other than the instantaneous view of Augustine.
to yet others of us, the evidence suggests that the Assembly intended to express no
more and no less than what Scripture expresses in the phrase “in six days” (Exodus
20:11). a summary of the three interpretations is given below.

A. first interpretation of intent
To begin with one must consider the context in which this phrase “in the space
of six days” is first used, and why the Westminster divines used it. The first known
appearance of the phrase is in Calvin’s Commentary on Genesis, ina passage in which
he is directly contradicting a figurative view of the creation days, in particular,
Augustine’s instantaneous creation view. It was included in the Irish Articles, authored
by Archbishop James Ussher, then professor of divinity at Dublin. The articles were
adopted by the church of ireland in 1615. Ussher’s language reflects Calvin’s concern
to exclude the Augustinian instantaneous creation view. Ussher held to six calendar

<a id="ga28-p178"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=180 printed_page=178 -->

days of creation, along with his young earth view that is reflected in his chronology It
is natural to infer from this that the Irish Articles specified the Six Calendar Day view.

this is of particular significance, for as Philip Schaff says these articles were
“the chief source of the latter ( Westminster Confession) ”129 To use a phrase from an
officially recognized confession of the irish church in any other sense than that which
it meant in that confession is improbable it was a phrase that had a particular meaning
by the time of the westminster Assembly. the reason for their use of the phrase lies in
just that fact. it was a succinct way of describing the six days of creation of genesis 1,
with the understanding that those days were normal, calendar days The significance of
this, together with the findings of the rev david h all130 regarding the meaning of the
phrase “in the space of six days” essentially settles the issue of what the westminster
Divines intended by this phrase. hall finds a number of the divines specifically
referring to six calendar days. Within such variation as existed among the Divines no
evidence is provided of support for views such as Day-Age, Framework, Analogical,
etc the original intent of the westminster confession and catechisms by the phrase
“in the space of six days” is clearly the affirmation that creation took place in six
calendar days.

that this was the interpretation of the church of the 17th century is clear from
the early commentaries on the Standards. Vincent affirms six calendar days, as does
Thomas Ridgeley in his Commentary on the Larger Catechism, published in 1731 131

B. Second Interpretation of Intent
Other committee members interpret the facts differently. The second
interpretation is that the intent of the westminster assembly was to express duration of
time in the creation days without being specific as to the exact nature or length of those
days The evidence is not strong enough to conclude that the Assembly wished to
exclude any view other than the instantaneous view of Augustine. Their view is as
follows:

as we seek to understand the teaching of the original intent of the westminster
Confession and Catechisms regarding creation, it is imperative that we consider (1) the

129 Philip Schaff. the creeds of christendom (New York: Harper and Row: 1877 [Grand Rapids:
Baker Book House, 1966]) 111:526. Both Alex. F. Mitchell and B. B. Warfield consider the Irish Articles a
primary source of the language of the westminster Confession.
130 See Did God Create in Six Days, Ed. Pipa & Hall, Chapters 2 & 11. Also:
http://capo.org/creation/Revise.html
l31Thomas Vincent, an explanation of the Assembly’s Shorter Catechism (Philadelphia:
Presbyterian Board of Publication, c. 1854 - first published in 1674): “He could have created all things
together in a moment, but he took six days’ time to work in, and rested on the seventh day,...” (p. 57, Q. 4
on S. Cat., Q. 9)
Thomas Ridgley, Commentary on the Larger Catechism (Edmonton, Alberta: Still Waters
Revival Books, 1993), 2 vols.: “We are now to consider the space of time, in which God created all
things, namely, in six days.” (Vol. 1, p. 331).

<a id="ga28-p179"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=181 printed_page=179 -->

historical time in which those documents were prepared, as well as (2) the function of
the phrase “in the space of six days” in the teaching of the confession

1. what is required of us at this time is to seek to understand clearly the context in
which the phrase “in the space of six days” is first used, and why the Westminster
divines us edit the first appearance of the phrase is in Calvin’s Commentary on
Genesis. It also appears in the influential Elizabethan Puritan William Perkins’s
exposition of ...the Creede, where he refers to the work of creation being done “in six
distinct days,” which he also paraphrases as “six distinct spaces of time ” The Irish
articles of 1615, produced by Archbishop James Ussher, who was much admired by the
Westminster divines, says in Article 18: “In the beginning of time, when no creature
had any being, God, by his word alone, in the space of six days, created all things, and
afterwards, by his providence, doth continue, propagate, and order them according to
his own will.” Clearly there is a tradition in Reformed circles prior to the Westminster
Assembly to use this phrase, which is no more or less specific regarding the nature and
length of the days in the irish articles than in the westminster confession

What is also clear is that this phrase is employed, at the very least, to distance
one’s position from a view of instantaneous creations uc has augustine had advocated
(and as was still being propagated at the time of the westminster Assembly, as
evidenced by the popular Religio Medici by Sir Thomas Browne, published in 1643)
What is not so clear is whether the phrase required six 24-hour days all of the relevant
sources (including the Westminster divines whose writings on this subject are available)
understand the sun, moon, and stars to be created only on the fourth day — one of the
facts from Genesis 1 that moved Augustine to his speculations about the creative days
and to a preference for instantaneous creation This caused Calvin to ponder about the
light created on the first day:

Further, it is certain, from the context, that the light was so created as to
be interchanged with darkness But it may be asked, whether light and
darkness succeeded each other in turn through the whole circuit of the
world, or whether the darkness occupied one half of the circle, while
light shone in the other. There is, however, no doubt that the order of
their succession was alternate, but whether it was everywhere day at the
same time, and everywhere night also, I would rather leave undecided,
nor is it very necessary to be known.132

this same sort of reticence about the nature of the days before the creation of the sun
may explain Perkins’s paraphrasing of “six distinct days” with the expression “six
distinct spaces of time ” whatever the nature and duration of the first three days, they
were not solar days (that is, not in the sense of days determined by a 24-hour rotation of
the earth in relation to the sun).

I32From his commentary on Gen 1:3, commentaries on the first book of moses catted genesis
(Grand Rapids: Baker Book House. 1979) l:76f.

<a id="ga28-p180"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=182 printed_page=180 -->

It has not been demonstrated that a majority of the Westminster divines intended for the phrase “in the space of six days” to mean six 24-hour days. At least five prominent members of the Assembly did so: John White, John Ley, John Lightfoot, George Walker, and William Twisse. Evidence that has been offered for up to twenty-one divines holding to such a view includes: the mere use of the expression “in six days,” but this begs the question of the nature of the days; agreement with James Ussher’s chronology for the age of the earth since the creation of Adam, but this is based on the genealogies of Genesis 5 and 11 and does not depend on the creative days being 24-hours; or the endorsement of certain works by members of the Assembly, but mere endorsement does not prove agreement to every statement in a book.

Among the five Westminster divines who clearly hold to six 24-hour days, some held to other specific points that the Assembly did not endorse. Lightfoot declared that creation must have been on the autumnal equinox, but Walker said it must be on the vernal equinox. Lightfoot also has Adam created at around 9 a.m. on the sixth day and Eve tempted around noon, with the fall of the human race occurring on the sixth day. Such speculations were not adopted by the Assembly.

2. How does the phrase “in the space of six days” function within the teaching of the Confession? The Assembly placed great emphasis on the doctrine of creation in the systematic teaching of the Standards. Like the sufficiency of Scripture, the decrees of God, and God’s covenant with man, the doctrine of creation by the Triune God is integral, part of the fabric of the document.¹³³ However, the more specific question of the length of the creation is mentioned only once, briefly. The length of creation does not hold the same integral place in the Confession as the broader doctrine of creation.

Moreover, the Assembly as a body chose not to specify the length of the days, whatever individual commissioners may have believed. It is well known that the Assembly was not shy to define its positions in detail, but it never did so on this matter. In the final analysis it is what they wrote, not what they thought, that is determinative of meaning. It is not a sound principle of interpretation to take the statements of individuals as defining the intent of a deliberative body.¹³⁴

¹³³ More or less explicit references to the doctrine are found in twenty eight places in the Confession alone: 1:1 (twice); 1:6; 2:2 (three times); 3:1, 5, 7; 5:1 (twice); 2, 4, 7; 7:1 (three times); 9:1; 10:4; 19:1; 5; 20:4; 21:1; 2, 7; 22:6; 23:1; 32:1.

¹³⁴ On another vital doctrine John Murray writes, “From early times in the era of the Reformation and throughout the development of the covenant theology the formulation has been deeply affected by the idea that a covenant is a compact or agreement between two parties.” The Covenant of Grace, (Phillipsburg, NJ: Presbyterian and Reformed, 1988, 5, our emphasis). Murray proceeds to critique this definition from Scripture. Today many are more inclined to define a covenant as “a bond in blood, sovereignly administered,” (O. Palmer Robertson) or “a sovereign administration of grace and promise” (Murray). None of us today considered himself out of accord with the intent of Chapter 7 of the Confession of Faith, though his view of covenant may include more than many of the divines as individuals would have intended.

<a id="ga28-p181"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=183 printed_page=181 -->

Moreover, the assembly did not require the more specific views of the
influential Lightfoot in its statement on the creation days This is because the Assembly
was seeking to confess the faith common to all On October 20, 1645, unimpeachable
supralapsarian Calvinist George Gillespie, contrary to his own specific opinion, urged
reserve on the assembly in its statement on the decree of god strong words had been
proposed. Gillespie stated, “When that word is left out, is it not a truth, and so everyone
may enjoy his own sense.” 135 Unlike the studied ambiguity of modern creedal
statements that allow unbelief, such reserve was motivated by the desire to establish
unity on the most important matters of biblical truth in the three kingdoms (England,
Scotland, and Ireland). And in its first chapter the Assembly confessed that sincere
Christians will not agree on everything in Scripture 116

it would appear that the question of the length of the creation days was not of
paramount importance to the Assembly No evidence has been produced that the
Assembly intended to exclude any view but the instantaneous creation view Even
granting that no long-day view has been found among the members of the Assembly,
some of us believe that in light of these contextual considerations it goes beyond the
evidence to claim that the phrase “in the space of six days” excludes any view other
than instantaneous creation

C. Third Interpretation of Intent
a third position held by some members of the committee is that although there
is evidence that certain individual members of the westminster assembly held to a
creation week of six calendar days, the best evidence of intent is the language of the
constitutional documents themselves This position holds that the confessional
language “in the space of six days” is substantially equivalent to Scripture, and that the
clear expressed intention of the westminster assembly is thus to be no more or less
explicit than Scripture itself

Under this analysis— that the constitutional language was intended to be
substantially equivalent to Scripture— the matter under debate is no longer a
Constitutional issue, because if a candidate were to take exception to the language “in
the space of six days” then he would be deemed to have taken exception to the language
of Scripture itself, such as Exodus 20:11: “[fjor in six days the LORD made the heavens
and the earth, the sea, and all that is in them .” If an examining court allows latitude
in the interpretation of genesis 1 and related passages regarding the length of creation
days, that same latitude should be allowed for the candidate’s interpretation of the
phrase “in the space of six days” contained in the Standards, and no exception should be

minutes of the westminster assembly of divines (1874 |Repnnt, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada:
Still Waters Revival Books, 1991], af Mitchell, and J Struthers, eds.) 151 Warfield comments '. . the
decision had been arrived at in the interest of what we may call, perhaps, comprehension — though this
must be understood, of course, as generic Calvinistic. and not universalistic Christian comprehension.
The Assembly had been led in this policy by the strictest Calvinists in the body.” The Westminster
Assembly and Its Work, (New York, Oxford University Press, 1931 [Grand Rapids. Baker Book House,
1991) 135.
U6WCF 1:7: “All things in Scripture are not alike plain in themselves, nor alike clear unto all...”

<a id="ga28-p182"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=184 printed_page=182 -->

noted If, on the other hand, an examining court does not grant latitude in the
interpretation of Genesis 1 and related passages, no exception should be allowed,
because the PCA obviously does not permit exception to the language of Scripture.

VI. Advice and Counsel of the Committee
the committee reminds the assembly of the tremendous theological
significance of the biblical doctrine of creation. As Bavinck points out, “The doctrine
of creation, affirming the distinction between the Creator and his creature is the starting
point of true religion ” 137

he goes onto say:
There is no existence apart from God, and the Creator can only be
known truly through revelation This creation is properly said to be ex
nihilo, ‘out of nothing,’ thus preserving the distinction in essence
between the creator and the world and the contingency of the world in
its dependence on God
Creation also means that time has a beginning, only God is eternal.
As creatures we are necessarily in time, and speculation about
pretemporal or extratemporal reality is useless speculation The purpose
and goal of creation is to be found solely in God’s will and glory. It is
especially in the reformed tradition that the honor and glory of god was
made the fundamental principle of all doctrine and conduct. A doctrine
of creation is one of the foundation al building block sofa biblical and
Christian worldview .138

The orthodox view includes the following elements: that Scripture is the inerrant
word of god and self-interpreting, the full historic i ty of genesis 1-3, the unique
creation of Adam and Eve in God’s image as our first parents, and Adam as the
covenant head of the human race a necessary corollary of this view is the fact that the
curse and the resultant discord in the universe began with the sin of Adam. It is the
incomprehensible God who has revealed himself clearly in nature and in Scripture. He
has revealed exactly what He intended, and those areas which are not revealed belong to
the Lord our God (Deut 29:29).

there are areas in which there are differences of interpretation of both scripture
and of our Standards, which we need to continue to explore patiently and respectfully
before God

in light of the present diversity regarding the creation doctrine in the PCA., the
committee was established to study the exegetical, hermeneutical, and theological
interpretations of genesis 1-3 and the original intent of the westminster Standards’

° 7Herman Bavinck. In the Beginning, foundations of christian Theology, (Grand Rapids: Baker
Book House. 1999), p. 23.
Ibid.

<a id="ga28-p183"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=185 printed_page=183 -->

phrase “in the space of six days,” . . [and to] report. . its findings, along with its non
binding advice and counsel if any.

as we have studied the history of this matter, reflected in Section II, it is clear
that there has been a good deal of diversity of opinion over the issue of the length of the
days throughout the history of the Church. it is this kind of diversity that is found in the
PCA today. The fact is that the Church, while affirming with one voice the creation of
all things visible and invisible by the triune God, has not comet oa unity of position on
the matter of the nature and length of the days, as she has with regard to such doctrines
as the trinity and the person of Christ. This indicates that the Westminster divines
were correct in their affirmation that “all things in Scripture are not alike plain in
themselves, nor alike clear unto all. . .” (WCF I, 7). We believe that this is the reason
that this Committee has not been able to reach unanimity. We have come to a better
understanding of each other’s views, resulting in a deeper respect for one another’s
integrity.

We are aware that this is a divisive issue. it is the hope and purpose of the
committee to give advice that could avoid any division of the church. While affirming
the above statement of what is involved in an orthodox view of creation, we recognize
that good men will differ on some other matters of interpretation of the creation
account. We urge the church to recognize honest differences, and join in continued
study of the issues, with energy and patience, and with a respect for the views and
integrity of each other.

it should be observed that the ordinary courts of jurisdiction for officers in the
church are the presbytery for the teaching elders and the session for the ruling elders
and deacons. these are the courts that deal with the theological position of the officers,
and it is not the prerogative of the assembly to interfere with the judgments of these
courts, except byway of review of the presbytery minutes, or by judicial process.

the advice of some who hold the calendar day view is that the General Assembly recognize that the intent of the westminster divines was the calendar day
view, and that any other view is an exception to the teaching of the Standards. A court
that grants an exception has the prerogative of not permitting the exception to be taught
at all. If the individual is permitted to teach his view, he must also agree to present the
position of the standards as the position of the Church.

others recommend that the assembly acknowledge that the four views of the
interpretation of the days expounded in this report are consistent with the teaching of
the standards on the doctrine of creation, and that those who hold one of these views
and who assent to the affirmations listed below should be received by the courts of the
church without notations of exceptions to the standards concerning the doctrine of
creation

<a id="ga28-p184"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=28 pdf_page=186 printed_page=184 -->

The advice of others on the committee is that the PCA has existed for over 25 years with a variety of viewpoints regarding creation being accepted, and a diversity of presbytery and sessional practices. These members of the Committee recognize that it would be disturbing to the Church if the Assembly sought to change the present practice of the Church which has provided for various ways of receiving candidates for office, who make the following affirmations.

All the Committee members join in these affirmations: The Scriptures, and hence Genesis 1-3, are the inerrant word of God. That Genesis 1-3 is a coherent account from the hand of Moses. That history, not myth, is the proper category for describing these chapters, and furthermore that their history is true. In these chapters we find the record of God's creation of the heavens and the earth ex nihilo; of the special creation of Adam and Eve as actual human beings, the parents of all humanity (hence they are not the products of evolution from lower forms of life). We further find the account of an historical fall, that brought all humanity into an estate of sin and misery, and of God's sure promise of a Redeemer. Because the Bible is the word of the Creator and Governor of all there is, it is right for us to find it speaking authoritatively to matters studied by historical and scientific research. We also believe that acceptance of, say, non-geocentric astronomy is consistent with full submission to Biblical authority. We recognize that a naturalistic worldview and true Christian faith are impossible to reconcile, and gladly take our stand with Biblical supernaturalism.

## PROPOSAL FOR REPORTING TO THE 28TH GENERAL ASSEMBLY

The Creation Study Committee recommends that the Assembly hear its report for up to one hour under the rules for “informal consideration” (Robert’s Rules of Order Newly Revised, 1990 ed. pp. 533-34), along with adoption of a rule (2/3rds vote required) that under this procedure no motions with respect to the report or recommendations be in order. During this period of informal consideration the committee will review its report, respond to questions and lead in discussion. Since instructed by the Assembly to bring “non-binding advice and counsel” (M26GA, p 191), the committee further recommends that at the conclusion of the allotted time, the following recommendations be adopted as a unit without amendment.

## RECOMMENDATIONS

We, therefore, recommend the following:

1. That the Creation Study Committee’s report, in its entirety, be distributed to all sessions and presbyteries of the PCA and made available for others who wish to study it. Adopted

2. That the Assembly declare its sense that in order to permit careful and prayerful contemplation of this matter, no further action of any kind with respect to this report be taken by the General Assembly for a period of at least two years. That since historically in Reformed theology there has been a diversity of views of the creation days among highly respected theologians, and, since the PCA has
