PDF text extraction artifact for divorce-remarriage.pdf
Title: Divorce and Remarriage: Complete Study
Extraction date: 2026-07-14
Extraction method: PCA Historical Center PDF text view verified against local GA minutes slice

--- range 1: 20th GA (1992), Appendix O, pp. 513-623 (ga20_1992:26938-32804) ---


AD INTERIM COMMITTEE ON
DIVORCE AND REMARRIAGE
TO THE TWENTIETH GENERAL ASSEMBLY
OF THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH IN AMERICA

INTRODUCTION

Due to the need for guidance regarding pastoral care of persons affected by divorce
or severe marital crisis, the 16th General Assembly appointed the Ad Interim
Committee to prepare a report which would include, but not be limited to, the
following:

a) A re-examination of biblical teaching concerning grounds for divorce and
remarriage. The committee shall ask whether the Westminster Confession
Chapter 24.6 is more lax or more restrictive than Scripture, and shall suggest
any revisions to that article of the Confession it deems appropriate. In
particular, the committee shall address the question, whether a Christian may
have other legitimate grounds for divorce, besides desertion by an unbelieving
spouse, or adultery (for example, inveterate physical abuse, marital rape or
other sexual abuse, attempted murder, or equally serious violations of the
marriage covenant).

b) Recommend guidelines and resources for pastoral care and counsel of couples
with marital difficulties, persons considering divorce or remarriage after
divorce, divorced persons, and children and other family members affected by
divorce." (1988 General Assembly, Overture #12)

This report represents the findings of the Committee. Having considered carefully
the request of the General Assembly, the Committee divided its research into three
parts. First, it was asked to consider whether the Confession is more lax or more
restrictive than Scripture, and whether any revisions to the Confession would be
appropriate at this time. Chapter 1, Historical Perspective on Divorce and Remarriage,
focuses on the conclusions reached by the Westminster Divines and the diversity of
views present in that day. Most of the issues debated today were debated then with a
broad range of answers, and the writings of the Puritan and Continental Divines provide
an interesting parallel to today's breadth of views in the PCA.

Second, the Committee was asked to consider whether there could be other
legitimate grounds for divorce besides "desertion by an unbelieving spouse" or
"adultery," namely, such harmful actions as inveterate physical abuse, attempted
murder, etc. Chapter 2, Scriptural Perspective on Divorce and Remarriage, seeks to

<a id="ga20-p514"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=516 printed_page=514 -->

address this issue by reexamining those passages of Scripture that deal with divorce and
remarriage. In the past, countless such studies have been made. There are no new
scriptures to which we may appeal for answers. Whatever answers there are in
Scripture will be based on those passages already studied by so many, and especially on
the interpretation of two major passages, Matthew 19:9 with its "exception clause," and
I Corinthians 7:10-15 with its details regarding "desertion.” This is the heart of the
debate. Can the "sexual immorality" (porneia) of Matthew 19:9 be understood to
include a variety of forms of sexual sin, or must it be limited only to one sexual
offense? Can "desertion" of I Corinthians 7 be understood to include such harmful
actions as physical abuse and attempted murder, or must it be limited only to an
unbelieving spouse leaving the house of a believer?

Actually, the Committee was not totally pleased with the wording of the request,
"whether a Christian may have other legitimate grounds for divorce..," as though the
task of the committee would be to find if there were other legal ways out of a marriage.
It is better to view Matthew 19:9 not as providing a ground for divorce but rather an
exception to the principle of the permanence of marriage. Also, as the report will show,
the "desertion" of I Corinthians 7 was not a ground for divorce, but rather an actual
incidence of divorce. Considerable thought has been given to the meaning of "sexual
immorality" and "desertion," and the findings of the Committee need to be pondered
carefully in the light of the entire chapter on Scripture.

Third, the Committee was asked to provide guidelines and resources for the PCA
in its pastoral care and counsel of all parties affected by marital difficulties, divorce, or
remarriage. Ruling and teaching elders will find this third chapter very helpful as they
seek to minister to people in these situations, and as they establish policy and
procedures for the churches. Many excellent insights and suggestions are given to help
in this most difficult pastoral task.

The Committee appreciates that pastors and sessions will adopt, modify, or
ignore the guidelines and resources as the case may be. In the Church, there are
significant differences of opinion regarding approaches to pastoral counseling. The
Committee will not recommend that the General Assembly adopt these guidelines, only
that they be made available for consideration. In this regard, let no one mistake the
attention we pay both to historical data and pastoral guidelines in chapters one and
three. We understand that Holy Scripture is, as our Confession says, "the supreme
authority" in this as in all matters of faith and practice. Our Confession, as a
subordinate standard, is a faithful effort to reproduce the Scripture's teaching.

In the process of preparing this report, the Committee received numerous
suggestions for improving the report. The Committee considered every suggestion,
whether it was from a presbytery, a session, or a particular elder. All were considered,
and some significant changes have been made as a result.

The format of the report is a basic one. The initial Outline serves as a summary of
the content of the report, and as an aid in finding the Committee's statements on specific
issues. Please be careful to read the Committee's specific statements in the context of
the whole report. Then three chapters follow dealing with the three parts of the report.

<a id="ga20-p515"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=517 printed_page=515 -->

Finally, in the Conclusion, a summary of our findings is stated, and it is followed by a
series of specific recommendations to the General Assembly. We have sought to make
the report readable and usable for all members of the PCA, and trust that it will bring
glory to God.

Committee Members
TE Andrew Boswell TE George Knight
South Florida Presbytery South Florida Presbytery

TE Paul B. Fowler, Chairman Dr. Diane Langberg, Advisor
South Florida Presbytery Philadelphia Presbytery

RE Joe Breese Johnson TE Robert Rayburn
TN Valley Presbytery Pacific NW Presbytery

RE Terry Jones TE Robert Stuart
Missouri Presbytery South Florida Presbytery

<a id="ga20-p516"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=518 printed_page=516 -->

THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY'S REPORT ON
DIVORCE AND REMARRIAGE

OUTLINE

CHAPTER 1
HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE ON DIVORCE AND REMARRIAGE

I. The Westminster Confession on Divorce and Remarriage

II. The Witness of the Early Church

III. The Original Intent of the Confession

IV. The Views of Three Prominent Puritan Divines
A. William Perkins (1558-1602)
B. William Gouge (1575-1653)
C. William Ames (1576-1633)

V. The Conclusion of the Westminster Divines

VI. The Views of Two Prominent Continental Divines
A. Theodore Beza (1519-1605)
B. Samuel Maresius (1599-1673)

#### VII. Conclusion

CHAPTER 2
SCRIPTURAL PERSPECTIVE ON DIVORCE AND REMARRIAGE

Issues Concerning Divorce and Remarriage
A. What our denominational heritage has said about marriage
B. What our denominational heritage has said about divorce and remarriage
C. What views may be found today within the evangelical-reformed community
regarding divorce and remarriage
1. No divorce, no remarriage
2. Strictly limited grounds for divorce, and for remarriage
3. Broader ground for divorce, and for remarriage
D. Are we to understand that Scripture indeed allows for divorce?
1. Divorce was permitted in Scripture
2. Divorce dissolved a marriage in Scripture
E. Does the evidence that divorce ends marriage mean that God looks favorably
at divorce? Malachi 2:13-16

<a id="ga20-p517"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=519 printed_page=517 -->

II. Consideration of Major Scripture Passages
A. Deuteronomy 24:1 -4
1. Is Moses giving a command to divorce?
2. What does the phrase "some indecency" mean?
3. Modem interpreters differ
4. Proceeding to the New Testament passages
B. Matthew 5:31-32
1. The rabbinic perversion of Deuteronomy 24
2. Jesus' correction of the rabbinic perversion
3. Interpretations influenced by the context of Matthew 5, the Sermon on
the Mount
C. Luke 16:17-18
D. Matthew 19:3-9 [Mark 10:2-11]
1. The context of Matthew 19:3-8
2. Divorce and remarriage in Matthew 19:9
3. The exception clause of Matthew 19:9

- **a.** The authenticity of Jesus' words
- **b.** The scope of the exception clause
- **c.** The meaning of porneia
- **d.** Is porneia ever used with an even broader meaning?
- **e.** What are the current interpretations of porneia?

View #1: porneia refers to sexual unfaithfulness before marriage
View #2: porneia refers to unfaithfulness in marriage, not restricted
to sexual sin
View #3: porneia refers to sexual unfaithfulness in marriage
f. Guidelines for applying the meaning of porneia
E. I Corinthians 7:10-15
1. Instruction to spouses both of whom are believers, verses 10-11
2. Important insights into verses 10-11
3. Instruction to a spouse married to an unbeliever, verses 12-15
4. Applying Paul's instruction about desertion today
5. Some concluding thoughts about remarriage, I Corinthians 7:39

CHAPTER 3
PASTORAL PERSPECTIVE ON DIVORCE AND REMARRIAGE

I. Prevention of Marital Problems
A. Statement of prevention rationale
B. Guidelines for prevention
C. Suggested outline for pre-marital counseling
D. Resources

II. Pastoral Care and Counsel of Couples with Marital Difficulties
A. Understanding the couple
B. Guidelines for marital counseling

<a id="ga20-p518"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=520 printed_page=518 -->

C. Practical considerations
D. Resources

III. Discipline As It Pertains to Couples Considering Divorce
A. Guidelines for discipline issues
1. The local church's responsibility to become involved
2. How does the local church become involved?
3. What if both spouses will talk with an elder?
4. What if one spouse refuses to talk with an elder?

- **a.** For the spouse who will talk with an elder
- **b.** For the spouse who will not talk with an elder

5. What if the elders pursue formal discipline?
B. Resources

IV. Pastoral Care and Counsel of Those Seeking Remarriage
A. Understanding the person seeking remarriage
B. Guidelines for remarriage
C. Concerns of those in the congregation who have been divorced
D. Practical considerations for ministering to those contemplating remarriage
E. Resources

V. Pastoral Care and Counsel of the Children of Divorced Parents
A. Understanding the child of divorced parents
B. Practical considerations for ministering to those contemplating remarriage
when children are involved
C. Resources
D. Addendum: "Ceremony for Recognition of Children at Remarriage"

VI. The Church's Ministry to the Separated and Divorced
A. Understanding the separated and divorced
B. Guidelines for ministry
C. Resources

I. "The Westminster Divines on Divorce for Physical Abuse”

II. "Divorce Reconsidered"

CONCLUSION

I. A Summary of the Findings of the Committee

II. Recommendations to the 20th General Assembly of the PCA

<a id="ga20-p519"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=521 printed_page=519 -->

CHAPTER 1

HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE ON DIVORCE AND REMARRIAGE

I. The Westminster Confession on Divorce and Remarriage
The 16th General Assembly (1988) of the Presbyterian Church in America
appointed a study committee to reexamine the biblical teaching on divorce and
remarriage and to ask whether the Westminster Confession of Faith is more lax or more
strict than Scripture on this issue and to propose any revisions deemed appropriate. 1

The assertions of the Confession to be queried are the following:

In the case of adultery after marriage, it is lawful for the innocent party to sue
out a divorce: and after the divorce to marry another, as if the offending party
were dead. (24.5)

Although the corruption of man be such as is apt to study arguments unduly
to put asunder those whom God hath joined together in marriage, yet, nothing
but adultery, or such wilful desertion as can no way be remedied by the
church, or civil magistrate, is cause sufficient of dissolving the bond of
marriage. (24.6)

It is not the first time in this century that the teaching of the Confession on divorce
has been reviewed by an American Presbyterian church body. The Presbyterian Church
in the U.S. A. in 1953 adopted a revised chapter on marriage and divorce, and the
Presbyterian Church in the U.S. followed with a revision of its own in 1959. The latter
was subsequently adopted by the Evangelical Presbyterian Church in 1984; it is
currently being reviewed by that church's standing committee on theology at the request
of the 9th General Assembly (1989).

Is the Confession too strict or too lax? or is it just right? The mid-century studies
cited above apparently found it too strict, but more recently it has come under attack by
some evangelicals for being too lax. William Heth and Gordon Wenham in particular
are critical of the Westminster position, which they call "the Erasmian view" inasmuch
as "the exegetical tradition started by Erasmus and amplified by Luther and the other
Reformers was confirmed by the above sections [24.5-6] in this Confession of Faith." 2

1 minutes of the sixteenth General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America, 1988, p. 41.

2 William A. Heth and Gordon J. Wenham, Jesus and Divorce: The Problem with the Evangelical
Consensus, Nashville, 1984, p. 83. The Westminster position is also implicitly criticized by J. Carl
Laney in The Divorce Myth: a biblical examination of divorce and Remarriage, Minneapolis, 1981.

<a id="ga20-p520"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=522 printed_page=520 -->

II. The Witness of the Early Church
The Heth-Wenham thesis is that Erasmus departed from the uniform teaching of
the early church that remarriage following divorce for any reason was adulterous, a
view which they defend as exegetically sound. It may be noted here that what they call
"the early church view" is more accurately "the final Augustinian view". As late as 413
Augustine wrote: "Nor is it clear from Scripture whether a man who has left his wife
because of adultery, which he is certainly permitted to do, is himself an adulterer if he
marries again. And if he should, i do not think that he would commit a grave sin." 3
Augustine's definitive position according to which such a man would be an adulterer
appears six years later in DE Conjugliis adulterinis. 4

It is by no means certain that Heth and Wenham adequately represent the teaching
of the early church. According to Jesuit scholar Theodore Mackin in his massive
Divorce and Remarriage, "Christian writers on the subject of adultery, divorce and
remarriage, beginning in the middle of the second century and continuing at least until
Augustine...never call the following persons adulterers: (1) A husband who remarries
after dismissing an adulterous wife. (2) A husband who remarries after being
abandoned by his wife. (3) a woman whom an ri es a mani neither of these two cases. " 5

Moreover, the Augustinian view was never adopted by the Eastern churches, all of
which permitted divorce and remarriage. Mackin summarizes the discipline of the
Byzantine Church in the thirteenth century as follows:

when a marriage is indissoluble this comes of its being a sacramental
marriage of two Christians. But even this indissolubility yields to divine
dispensation as this was expressed by Christ in the exceptive clause recorded
in Matthew 5:32 and 19:9...In the circumstances envisioned by the Matthean
passages the Church was thought to be authorized to separate the spouses, to
dissolve their marriage in the name of and by the authority of God . . .Porneia
in the exceptive clause was taken to designate adultery; dismissal was taken
to designate the dissolution of the marriage.

But the adultery warranting dismissal and dissolution was understood to be
not the only cause, but to be only a sample and a point of departure for other
and equivalent causes. It was taken as self-evident that other crimes are
possible to spouses that injure their marriages with equal or greater severity.
Abortion and attempted murder of the spouse were only two of these. 6

3 Augustine, On Faith and Works, trans. Gregory J. Lombardo, New York, 1988, ch. 19 (35) p. 43.

4 Ibid, note 198, p. 98.

5 Theodore Mackin, Divorce and Remarriage, New York, 1984, p. 172

6 Ibid, p. 373.

<a id="ga20-p521"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=523 printed_page=521 -->

The historic difference between the Roman Catholic and the Eastern Orthodox
churches on the doctrine of divorce persists down to the present day. 7 Thus, while
Erasmus should be given his due for his exegetical contribution to the discussion, to
label the view which permits remarriage following divorce for just cause "Erasmian" is
misleading.

In any case, of more immediate concern than the question of historical antecedents
is the question of what the Confession actually teaches, especially with respect to
"desertion" as a second ground for divorce alongside adultery. To judge whether the
Westminster position is too strict or too lax, we must first determine what it is. This
may not be entirely simple.

III. The Original Intent of the Confession
It is a sound principle that constitutional documents should be interpreted
according to their original intent. For creeds and confessions to function as subordinate
norms, they must be read according to the grammatico-historical method of
interpretation. Confessional subscription is not to anything the words can be taken to
mean, but rather to the discourse meaning of the text. 8

The Westminster divines took up the question of marriage and divorce in 1646, the
year the Confession was completed (apart from the proof texts requested by
Parliament). The minutes record the following actions. The committee assignment was
made February 23. The report on marriage was presented June 17 and debated August
3-4. The report on divorce was presented August 10 and debated September 10-11.
The proposed chapter "Of Marriage and Divorce" as a whole was debated November 9,
and the section on wilful desertion was recommited. The committee reported back the
next day, and, following further debate on wilful desertion, the Assembly on November
11 adopted the chapter "Of Marriage and Divorce" as we now know it. 9

It is of interest that none of the antecedent Reformed confessions in the British
Isles - neither the Scots Confession (1560) nor the Thirty-Nine Articles of the Church
of England (1563) nor the Irish Articles of Religion (1615) - include a statement on

7 Cf. Gregor Larentzakis, "Marriage, Divorce and Remarriage in the Orthodox Church," Theology Digest
26 (1978) pp. 232-234. The discipline of the Roman Catholic church is another matter. See Joseph P.
Zwack, Annulment Your Chance to Remarry within the Catholic Church, New York, 1983.

8 The term discourse meaning points us back to the event of the utterance or act of writing which is
contextually informed and determinative for meaning". Peter Cotterell and Max Turner, Linguistics and
Biblical Interpretation, Downers Grove, Illinois, 1989, p. 69.

9 minutes of the session of the westminster assembly of Divines, ed. Alexander F. Mitchell and John
Struthers, Edinburgh, 1976, pp. 190, 244, 262-264, 266, 279-280, 299, 300. Unfortunately, George
Gillespie's fuller notes of debates and proceedings of the assembly of divines and other commissioners
at Westminster, Edinburgh, 1846, records only from February 1644 to January 1645. Similarly, John
Lightfoot's journal of the proceedings of the assembly of divines is limited to the calendar years 1643-
1644.

<a id="ga20-p522"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=524 printed_page=522 -->

divorce, and the articles on marriage in the latter two documents focus narrowly on the
question of a celibate clergy. According to the Thirty-Nine Articles:

Bishops, priests, and deacons are not commanded by God's law either to vow
the estate of single life or to abstain from marriage. Therefore it is lawful also
for them, as for all other Christian men, to marry at their own discretion as
they shall judge the same to serve better to godliness. (32)

The parallel affirmation in the Irish Articles of Religion is only slightly broader.

For the preservation of the chastity of men's persons, wedlock is commanded
unto all men that stand in need thereof. Neither is there any prohibition by
the Word of God but that the ministers of the Church may enter into the state
of matrimony: they being nowhere commanded by God's law ...[remainder
repeats the Thirty-Nine Articles verbatim], (64)

Taking into account also the Reformed confessions on the continent, the only
Reformed creed to contain any reference to divorce prior to the Westminster Confession
is the First Helvetic Confession (1536), which in its teaching on marriage includes a
word for the civil government:

We contend that marriage has been instituted and prescribed by God for all
men who are qualified and fit for it and who have not otherwise been called
by God to live a chaste life outside marriage. No order or state is so holy and
honorable that marriage would be opposed to it and should be forbidden.
Since such marriages should be confirmed in the presence of the Church by a
public exhortation and vow in keeping with its dignity, the government should
also respect it and see to it that a marriage is legally and decently entered into
and given legal and honorable recognition, and is not lightly dissolved without
serious and legitimate grounds (27); emphasis added. 10

Although the Westminster articles on divorce are without confessional precedent
in the Reformed churches, they are understandable given the historical circumstances of
the Westminster Assembly. By the Solemn League and Covenant (1643) both
Assembly and Parliament were sworn to preserve and extend "the reformed religion"
and to "endeavor to bring the Churches of God in the three kingdoms [Scotland,
England, and Ireland] to the nearest conjunction and uniformity in [that] religion" (1st
vow). As its dual title indicates, the Solemn League and Covenant was a political
instrument as well as a religious commitment. At its heart lay "the conviction that the
unity of a society inheres in its religion and church . " 11

10 The Second Helvetic Confession (1566), although silent on divorce, is unique in making this proposal:
"Let lawful courts be established in the Church, and holy judges who may care for marriages, and may
repress all unchastity and shamefulness, and before whom matrimonial disputes may be settled." (29)

11 John H. Leith, Assembly at Westminster: Reformed Theology in the Making, Richmond, 1973, p. 59.

<a id="ga20-p523"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=525 printed_page=523 -->

Given the conception of a religiously unified society and the intimate connection
between church and state that obtains under such circumstances, it is not surprising to
find the social institution of marriage among the articles of religion addressed by the
Westminster Confession. The Assembly no doubt judged that the unity of both church
and society would be well-served by a confessional exposition of the doctrine of
marriage, including the biblical grounds for its dissolution, a controversial issue in 17th
century Britain. 12 The Scottish Parliament, already in 1573, had enacted legislation
which allowed divorce for desertion. 13 With Anglo-catholics, on the one hand, still
arguing that marriage was indissoluble, and Milton, on the other, lobbying for divorce
on grounds of incompatibility, the question could hardly be ignored as it was bound to
have an effect on the civil law. 14

As it turned out, Parliament did not take the "humble advice" of its assembled
divines on this issue but omitted the paragraphs on divorce in its authorized edition of
the Confession published in 1648. The Savoy Declaration (1658) also chose to do
without them, so it has fallen to the Presbyterian churches to wrestle with their
confessional status.

Between the rigorous Anglican view and the relaxed view of Milton the
Westminster position on divorce might seem to be a golden mean, but it was not
adopted for any reason other than that it was believed to be biblical.

IV. The Views of Three Prominent Puritan Divines
A. William Perkins (1558-1602)

Remarriage following divorce for adultery had long been permitted by English
Puritan divines. The exegesis of the exceptive clause in Matthew given by William
Perkins (1558-1602) is typical:

By fornication, Christ meaneth not every sin of that kind, but only the
sin of adultery; or that which is greater in that kind, namely incest... The
exception belongs to the whole answer of our savior Christ, denying

12 Cf. James Turner Johnson, A Society Ordained by God: English Puritan Marriage Doctrine in the
first half of the seventeenth Century, Nashville, 1970. A useful discussion, but unaccountably it does
not include the Westminster Confession.

13 Marriage and Divorce: a report of the study panel of the free church of Scotland, Edinburgh, 1988,
p. 28. "These two causes for the termination of marriage [adultery and desertion] ... remained the only
two grounds for divorce in Scotland until 1938 when cruelty, incurable insanity, sodomy and beastiality
were added by Act of Parliament" (p. 28). More radical legislation was enacted in 1976 and 1977 (p. 5).

14 John Milton, the doctrine and discipline of Divorce: Restor'd to the good of both sexes from the
bondage of canon law and other mistakes ... to the parliament of england with the [Westminster]
Assembly, 2nd ed., London, 1644. The 1st edition was published in 1643; both editions, along with
Milton's other divorce tracts, are included incomplete prose works of john Milton, vol. 2, 1643-1648,
ed. Ernest Sirluck, New Haven, 1959.

<a id="ga20-p524"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=526 printed_page=524 -->

divorce, save only for adultery; and permitting no marriage after
divorcement, save only where divorce is for adultery. 15

Although he is expounding the Sermon on the Mount, Perkins brings in I
Corinthians 7:15. desertion of a believer by an unbeliever is not viewed as a second
ground for divorce, but it is nevertheless another circumstance which results in the
dissolution of the marriage.

The malicious or wilfull departing of the unbeliever, doth dissolve the
marriage; but that is no cause of giving a bill of divorce: only adultery
causeth that. Here the believer is a mere patient, and the divorce is made
by the unbeliever, who unjustly forsaketh, and so puts away the other. 16

With respect to I Corinthians 7:10-11, where both marriage partners are believers,
Perkins says: "The Apostle speaketh of departure, and putting away, for other causes
than adultery; as for hatred, dislike, etc., which indeed are not sufficient causes of
divorce, and therefore they that separate thereupon, ought not to marry ."17

Perkins' definitive treatment of desertion is found in his Christian Oeconomie. He
begins with a definition: "Desertion is when one of the married folks upon a wilful and
obstinate mind of their own head departeth from the other without a just and necessary
cause. " 18 He then discusses "sundry cases".

Case 1: "Suppose that an husband which is an unbeliever or a heretic in the foundation,
of his own accord, upon detestation of true religion, quite forsakes the believing wife,
and denies any more to dwell with her: what is to be done?” The answer is relatively
straightforward: "All good means must be used to bring the infected [sic] party to
repentance; and when none will succeed, but the case remaineth desperate, then
marriage is dissolved on his part, and the believing wife is free to marry another." 19

Case 2: "What if there fall out a desertion between two married folks, which are both
believers?" The answer here is more complicated:

The faulty person, who is the cause of his desertion, is to be forced by course of
civil, and ecclesiastical censure to perform his, or her duty. Upon which

15 William Perkins, a godly and learned exposition of Christ's Sermon on the Mount: Preached in
Cambridge by that Reverend and Judicious Divine M. William Perkins. Workes, Cambridge, 1618, vol.
3, p. 69. Perkins specifically rejects contagious and incurable disease and attempted murder as grounds
for divorce.

16 Ibid.

17 Ibid, pp. 70-71.

18 William Perkins, Christian Oeconomie: Or, a short survey of the right manner of erecting and
Ordering a Family According to the Scriptures, trans. Thomas Pickering. Workes, Cambridge, 1618, vol.
3, p. 687.

19 Ibid.

<a id="ga20-p525"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=527 printed_page=525 -->

proceeding if he remain obstinate and perverse in will; the other must in patience,
and earnest prayer unto God, wait the time, until his mind may be changed, and he
be made to relent by the order of the Magistrate. But if one of them, by just
occasion of fear, be compelled to depart from the other: and cannot return again
without apparent danger of life; in this case they are not bound to return; but the
delinquent party is to remain solitary, till they be instructed and made willing to do
their duties: and in the meanwhile, the party innocent must be resolved that God
hath called him or her to a single life.

Again, be it that the one is resolutely unwilling to dwell with the other, and
thereupon flies away without any fault of the other: if the thing after a long space
be sufficiently known before-hand, and all probable means have been used, to
reclaim the guilty person; yea, being called he doth not personally appear before
the judge, to yield a reason of the fact; after public and solemn declarations made,
the Minister upon such desertion may pronounce the marriage to be dissolved.
For he that upon malice flieth away from his mate, is to be holden in the same
terms as with an unbeliever, who departs upon detestation of religion, and the
service of God, I Timothy 5:8. 20

Although the deserting partner in this instance is a professed believer, his or her
malicious abandonment of a Christian marriage puts the deserter in the category of an
unbeliever so far as the question of dissolution is concerned. Perkins does not say that a
sentence of excommunication must precede the pronouncement of dissolution, though
such apparently was required by an Act of the Scottish Parliament in 1573 allowing
divorce on grounds of desertion. 21

Perkins next takes up "malicious dealing" as a sub-category of desertion.
Although it follows Case 2 (Christian marriages), it is actually a refinement of Case 1
(mixed marriages). Once again he begins with a definition:

Like unto desertion is malicious and spiteful dealing of married folks one with the
other. Malicious dealing is, when dwelling together, they require of each other
intolerable conditions ... Here it may be demanded, what a believer should do, who
is in certain and imminent danger, either of loss of life, or breach of conscience, if
they both abide together.

If [this danger is] from a stranger, then the husband either takes upon him the
defence of his believing wife, or not; if he doth, then she ought to abide with him.
If not, she may depart and provide for her own safety. Again, if the husband

20 Ibid, pp. 687-688; emphasis added.

21 According to the study panel of the Free Church of Scotland cited earlier: "The procedure required by
the Act was surprisingly elaborate: the civil authorities were to make every effort to apprehend the
deserter and oblige him to return to his wife and home; if they failed, they were to declare him an outlaw.
They were then to notify the ecclesiastical authorities who, if also unsuccessful, were to excommunicate
him. The marriage could be ended by divorce provided the deserted spouse had always shown
willingness 'to adhere' ... i.e. to have the deserter back and to continue the marriage." Marriage and
Divorce, p. 39.

<a id="ga20-p526"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=528 printed_page=526 -->

threateneth hurt, the believing wife may flie in this case; and it is all one, as if the
unbelieving man should depart. For to depart from one, and drive one away by
threat, are equipollent. 22

Perkins is aware that this goes beyond the strict terms of I Corinthians 7:15 and
anticipates an objection: "It is alleged, that if this be so, then the believing wife
forsakes the unbelieving husband, which she may not do." He answers: "She forsakes
him not finally, but leaves him for a time. Again, the desertion is not made by the
person, which giveth place for the time, but by him in whom is the cause of the
desertion." 23

By introducing the category of "malicious dealing" Perkins shows his willingness
to draw inferences from the biblical text in order to make application to additional
circumstances not directly addressed in Scripture. In this instance, however, he appears
to have fallen short of drawing out the full implications of this position. Although
"malicious dealing" is like wilful desertion to the point of being "equipollent", it
nevertheless justifies only temporary separation of a believer from an unbeliever, not
full divorce. The remaining question is whether Perkins would countenance divorce by
the innocent party should the malicious dealing continue and the temporary separation,
of necessity, continue indefinitely. 24

22 Christian Oeconomie, p. 688. The Oxford English Dictionary defines 'equipollent' as follows: "A.
adj. 3. c. propositions which express the same thing, notwithstanding formal diversity . . . B. an
equivalent."

23 Ibid.

24 J. I. Packer judges Perkins to have permitted divorce and remarriage to the innocent spouse in the
case of desertion and that desertion was understood by him 'to cover all behavior that nullified the
matrimonial relationship in practice', such as the imposition of intolerable conditions. He further links
Perkins' view with that already developed by some of the continental reformers and suggests that 'most'
Puritans followed Perkins in these opinions. a quest for Godliness: the puritan vision of the christian
Life, Wheaton, 1990, p. 269.
This interpretation of Perkins has been sharply criticized by D. Lachman in "Divorce
Reconsidered," The Presbyterian Advocate, vol. 1., No. 5 (May-June 1991) pp. 1, 17-20). Dr. Lachman
understands Perkins to mean that only actual physical abandonment of house and home constitutes such
desertion as may justify the eventual dissolution of a marriage. Separations necessary to ensure the
safety of a victimized spouse, contrarily, are of a different kind and never justify such a dissolution, even
if the spouses never again cohabit. This reading of Perkins is possible, but the committee is not
persuaded that this is certainly his meaning. In speaking of such desertions Perkins does indeed say that
'in the meanwhile, the party innocent must be resolved that God hath called him or her to a single life.’
But he then immediately proceeds to say that if the deserter proves 'resolutely unwilling' after all means
have been exhausted, the marriage may be dissolved. The question is whether, in the last instance,
Perkins is speaking only of a departing spouse or also of an abusive one. The committee wonders
whether Dr. Lachman has given sufficient weight to Perkins' acknowledgment that 'to depart from one,
and drive away by threats, are equipollent.' If an abusive spouse is thus a deserter, has not the way been
opened to consider unremedied physical cruelty as a form of desertion with 'equipollent' consequences.
Dr. Lachman also cites Andrew Willet. While Willet does not deal specifically with the question here at
issue, he does, in a section not cited in Dr. Lachman's article, claim general agreement with Beza who, as
we note below, takes the position Dr. Lachman is here rejecting.

<a id="ga20-p527"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=529 printed_page=527 -->

Case 3: "When the husband is perpetually absent from the wife, what is to be done?"
Wilful absenteeism, which is often the modem meaning of "desertion" in marriage
contexts, is placed under the principles already discussed by Perkins. This is another
example of this esteemed Puritan theologian's ability to apply the Word of God as
circumstances require.

B. William Gouge (1575-1653)

Of the Westminster divines who published works on marriage, the most important
is William Gouge who chaired the Assembly's committee on divorce. Gouge's
Domesticall Duties first appeared in 1622; a second and third edition followed in 1626
and 1634. His position on grounds for divorce is succinctly stated in opposition to "the
error of the papists": "Concerning adultery, we deny not, but that it giveth just cause of
divorce: but withall we say (as we have good warrant from Christ's words) that it is the
only cause of just divorce". 25

Although adultery provides just cause for divorce, it does not in itself dissolve the
marriage. On the question of pardoning adultery upon repentance of the guilty party
Gouge counsels, '"iiiough it be not meet in this case to impose it as an inviolable law
upon the innocent party to retain the delinquent because of repentance (for we have no
direct and strict warrant for it) yet I doubt not but they may so do, if they will, and that
without just exception to the contrary they ought so to do." 26

The second treatise devotes a section to desertion, which begins with a rather
wordy definition:

The vice contrary to matrimonial unity is desertion, when one of the married
couple through indignation of the true religion, and utter detestation thereof, or
some other cause, shall apparently renounce all matrimonial unity, and withdraw
him or herself from all society with the other, and live among infidels, idolaters,
heretics, or other such persecutors, as a faithful Christian with safety of life, or a
good conscience, cannot abide among, and though all good means that can be
thought to be used to reclaim the party so departed, yet nothing will prevail, but
obstinately persisteth in renouncing all matrimonial fellowship. 27

This does not mean, as Perkins taught, that the innocent party is free to remarry.
Citing I Corinthians 7:15 ("A brother or a sister is not under bondage in such cases")
Gouge comments, "By bondage he meaneth matrimonial subjection (by reason whereof
neither of the married persons have power of their own body, but one of the others)." In
other words, the innocent party is free from the obligation of conjugal relations and
need not seek after the delinquent party; yet the marriage is not wholly dissolved.

25 William Gouge, of domestic all duties eight Treatises, 3rd ed., London, 1634, vol II, ii, P. 16.

26 Ibid, p. 6.

27 Ibid, p. 3.

<a id="ga20-p528"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=530 printed_page=528 -->

Gouge is aware of other Reformed interpretations of the Pauline release, but he does not
feel it is incumbent upon him to deal with the exegesis because the problem is remote.

In many reformed Churches beyond the seas desertion is accounted so far to
dissolve the very bond of marriage, as liberty is given to the party forsaken to
marry another; and it is also applied to other cases than that which is above
mentioned: as when an infidel, idolater, or heretic shall depart from one of the true
religion for other causes than hatred of religion: or when both man and wife
having lived [sic] as idolaters among idolaters, one of them being converted to the
true faith, leaveth his abode among idolaters, and goeth to the professors of the
true faith, but can by no means get the other party to remove: or where one of the
true religion shall depart from another of the same profession, and will by no
means be brought to live with the party so left, but openly manifesteth peremptory
obstancy [sic]; the matter being heard and adjudged by the magistrate, the
marriage bond may be broken; and liberty given to the party forsaken to marry
another. But because our church hath no such customs, nor our law determined
such cases, i leave them to the custom of other churches. 28

One could wish that Gouge had published a post-Assembly volume on How My
Mind Has Changed. Perhaps the Scottish commissioners pointed out that divorce for
desertion not only had the approval of Reformed churches beyond the seas but also
parliamentary authorization (since 1573) in one of the three island kingdoms now in
solemn league and covenant.

C. William Ames (1576-1633)

Further it is of considerable importance to note that among other English Puritans
not only could support be found for the opinion that divorce for desertion conferred the
right of remarriage upon the innocent party, but apparendy also for the opinion that this
desertion could occur as well by the imposition of intolerable conditions as by actual
departure. William Ames, certainly a representative Puritan Divine (one English
edition of his celebrated marrow of divinity was printed 'by order from the honorable
House of Commons'), speaks to the question in his Conscience with the Power and
Cases Thereof. 29 After first affirming the indissolubility of marriage, he begins his
discussion of divorce.

A.3. Neverthelesse, it is not so indissoluble, but that upon such cause, as God
approveth to bee just it may been dissolved. For that indissolubility was not
instituted for the punishment, but the comfort of the innocent and doth admit some
exception, in which God ceaseth to joyne them. Matthew 19:6, 9.

A.4. 'There is not any just cause of making, a divorce approved in Scriptures,
besides adultery and the like horrid impurities, whereby it comes to passe, that two

28 Ibid-, emphasis added.

29 ET: 1639, pp. 208-209.

<a id="ga20-p529"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=531 printed_page=529 -->

remaine no longer one flesh but divided; and so the faith of Wedlock, is directly
violated; Matthew 5:31 and 19:9.

After ruling out contagious disease as a ground of divorce in the following
paragraph, he takes up desertion.

A.6 . 'An obstinate desertion, although in the party deserting, it containeth no just
cause of making a divorce, yet it makes a faire cause for the party deserted, after
the triall of all other meanes in vaine, to suffer a divorce, I Corinthians 7:15.

A.7. 'A voluntary and spontaneous absence, if it bee beyond the time appointed
and continued by deceit, is of the same nature, with a professed desertion.

A.8. The great danger, which one party may bee in by the cruelty of the other, or
by any other manifest meanes of cohabitation [sive aliunde manifesto emineat ex
cohabitatione], may bee just cause of retiring for a time, so to provide for his owne
safety and security, but not for an absolute desertion, unlesse first hee bee deserted.
For if one party drive away the other with great fierceness and cruelty, there is
cause of desertion, and hee is to bee reputed the deserter. But if hee obstinately
neglect, that necessary departure of the other avoyding the eminent danger, hee
himselfe in that playeth the deserter. '30

The passage is not a model of clarity in either its original Latin or English
translation, but, taking the words in their simple sense, Ames seems to be
acknowledging that such a desertion as can absolve the innocent partner of any
remaining obligation to the marriage can consist of the imposition of intolerable
conditions threatening physical safety and security as well as of physical departure per
se. This interpretation gathers strength from the fact, to be elaborated below, that such
a point of view was well established among reformed authorities on the continent where
Ames' professional career was largely spent.

V. The Conclusion of the Westminster Divines
It may be fairly assumed that the works of Perkins, Ames, and Gouge were widely
known by the Westminster divines. It is by no means an easy thing to determine whose
opinion would have carried a greater weight with the 'typical' delegate to the Assembly.

30 It is interesting that in his Marrow, dating from nearly the same period as his Conscience. Ames says
only this on divorce [ET: 1968, p. 320]: 'Adultery is most truly and essentially opposed to marriage, for
by its very nature it breaks the bond and covenant of marriage. It is the proper and just cause of divorce,
which cannot be said of any other sins although they be more grievous. A just divorce dissolves the very
bond of marriage.' Ames is not excluding desertion here. Rather, in all likelihood, with many other
reformed authorities, he is distinguishing between adultery as the sole legitimate 'ground' of divorce and
desertion in which the innocent party is the passive victim, the one who is divorced. A comparison of the
two passages may suggest that the precise construction of desertion was considered a detail of the
doctrine and ethics of divorce and, therefore, would be omitted in briefer accounts. The larger consensus,
primarily negative on divorce and adamant as to the general indissolubility of the marriage vows, could
be simply stated with an appeal to the dominical statement.

<a id="ga20-p530"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=532 printed_page=530 -->

It is therefore not at all clear how the divines as a whole may have understood desertion
or, for example, whether they would have regarded unremedied physical abuse as
tantamount to desertion, as justification for divorce, and, if so, for remarriage.

As it is, no record of the substance of the Assembly's debate on desertion is extant.
The official minutes record the original resolutions and their disposition by the
Assembly. With respect to adultery, the Assembly debated the divorce and remarriage
clauses separately and adopted both. The resolutions on desertion proved to be more
controversial.

If either of the married persons forsake their yokefellow, and by no means that can
be used by the party forsaken, or friends, or magistrate, will be reduced[i.e.,
brought back or restored], after sufficient time set down by the magistrate, and
made known to the party that so desireth, it is lawful for the innocent party to
marry another.

Wilful and obstinate desertion of one married party giveth just cause to the other,
after all means used to reduce [i.e., to bring back or restore] the offending person,
to sue out a divorce and for liberty to marry another. 31

When the report was debated on September 10-11, the first of these paragraphs
was waived and the second adopted, along with the statement, "Other causes of divorce
between two parties lawfully married besides these the Scriptures do nowhere allow.”
But when the chapter as a whole came before the Assembly on November 9, the second
paragraph was recommited. According to a familiar pattern, the committee was "the
brethren that did except against that clause". 32 The brethren are not named, but the
final recension (24.6) is thought to reflect Scottish influence in particular. 33

The Confession, as finally adopted, does not explicitly restrict desertion as just
cause for divorce to mixed marriages, a point observed at some length by John Murray
in his widely-circulated Divorce. 34 This may or may not have been intentional.

VI. The Views of Two Prominent Continental Divines
The larger Reformed Church shared the Westminster Assembly's general
conclusions touching marriage and divorce, though, no doubt, many would have stated

31 minutes of the sessions of the westminster Assembly, p. 280.

32 Ibid, p. 299.

33 Marriage and Divorce, pp. 39-40.

34 John Murray, Divorce, Philadelphia, 1953, pp. 76-77. Originally published in the Westminster
Theological Journal, 1946-49; reprinted by Presbyterian and Reformed, 1961. Murray concluded that
"the proposition respecting wilful desertion in the Confession is not sufficiently guarded and delimited so
as to confine itself to the teaching of the apostle in this passage."

<a id="ga20-p531"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=533 printed_page=531 -->

the general consensus to suit a broader or more strict construction of it. W. Geesink 35
offers this summary from his Dutch Reformed perspective:

'The Reformed recognize only two grounds of divorce, namely adultery and
desertio malitiosa religionis causa (I Corinthians 7:15), which then is expanded to
desertion in a broader sense. Concerning the ground of adultery they were all in
agreement. Regarding desertio malitiosa one finds only here and there a
wavering.'

A. Theodore Beza (1519-1605)

Geesink refers to Beza as a representative of this consensus. Beza himself, whom
Milton characterized as 'one of the strictest against divorce' 36 devoted a separate
treatise to the subject. 37 Concerning desertion, once having established that the
innocent party may remarry (Beza also solves the difficulty of reconciling I Corinthians
7 with Matthew 19 by maintaining that only adultery is a 'ground' of divorce, Paul's
remarks regarding desertion dealing instead with the case of the innocent party who is
the passive victim of another's unjustified divorce), he considers 'desertion in the
broader sense'.

'... we know him also to be a deserter who does not refuse cohabitation, but
obstinately demands impious conditions.' [p. 94]

It is asked whether the faithful in turn may desert the unfaithful? ... in noway is
that to be permitted ... (he refers again to Paul's argument in I Corinthians 7 and to
the fact that the faithful spouse sanctifies the unfaithful). But, i repeat what i said
shortly before, namely that he appears the deserter not only who positively refuses
a mutual living together, but also who demands intolerable conditions from the
faithful [spouse], such as if the unfaithful spouse absolutely compels the faithful to
attend the abominable Mass, in a word any doing or enduring of something
altogether against the obligation of piety. From this, therefore, another question
occurs: what should the faithful [spouse] do when indeed cohabitation is not
denied, but either hazard of life is incurred or something is either to be done or
endured against the true religion. I respond that these two distinctions are to be
observed. First, either the unfaithful [spouse], whether intentionally or
unwittingly, persecutes the faithful spouse, or the persecution arises from some
other direction. If the former, the faithful spouse really has a suitable excuse for
shunning her domestic enemy for no other reason than that she should consider her
life and conscience, and I would decide in this case nothing other than if the
unfaithful spouse himself had departed for another. To depart from someone and

35 Gereformeerde Ethiek, vol. 2, Kampen, 1931, p. 284.

36 Tetrachordon: Expositions upon the foure chief places in Scripture, which treat of Mariage, or
nulities in Mariage , (1645) Complete Prose Works, vol. 2, p. 227.

37 De Repudiis el Divortiis, Tractationes Theologiae, vol. 2, Geneve, 1582. The section of the essay
devoted to divorce is pp. 83-109. For John Calvin's viewpoint see footnote 41 infra and pp. 2394 ff of the
paper by W. S. Barker in the appendix to this report.

<a id="ga20-p532"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=534 printed_page=532 -->

to drive the other away by threats or force are the same thing. But if such
persecution should assail [the faithful spouse] from some other direction, the
faithful spouse should act at length more moderately than if she should cherish an
enemy in her home and bosom. Nor is it to be doubted that if the unfaithful spouse
should attend the faithful with conjugal love, should provide for her life in every
way, in this case the faithful spouse rather should bear whatever you will than that
is should be her duty to abandon the unfaithful spouse. But if the unfaithful spouse
does not care as is right that the faithful spouse is in peril, no one does not see, I
think, not only that he is a deserter, but also that he may be shunned with a good
conscience as a traitor.' [pp. 96-97]38

B. Samuel Maresius (1599-1673)

Samuel Maresius,39 certainly a representative reformed divine from the general
period of the Westminster Assembly, provides a summation which includes the broader
construction of desertion and that without any indication that this was particularly
controversial.

The legitimacy of divorce is established, such that the offended party acquires the
right to make new [marriage] vows, for only two causes in the new covenant, even
if civil laws and some erudite today think it right to allow more, namely Adultery,
as Christ says ... Matthew 5:32; 19:9 and Malitiosa Desertio ... (the brother or
sister is not bound in such a case, viz. that he should remain unmarried) I
Corinthians 7:15. But such desertion is taken to be not only a determined and
permanent withdrawal from the marital home and companionship, but an obstinate
denial of the obligations of marriage, by intolerable cruelty putting life at hazard
for the present, or from either treacherous or naked force, by the acceptance of a
mistress, and whatever, by analogy, is equivalent to or greater than this desertion.
If, however, a spouse ... should only go over to the enemies (i.e. religious?) or
desert the true religion, he is not by this to be considered guilty of this malicious
desertion which severs the bond of marriage, if only the other spouse is able to
cohabit with him with a clear conscience.'

38 bulling er speaks similarly in the final chapter of his the christians tate of Matrimonye, trans. Miles
Coverdale, 1541. After speaking to the Lord's permission of divorce, of the duty of married persons to
'diligently eschew all occasions of divorce' and to know that they must prove a painful medicine if they
will have divorce to be their comfort,' of the many cases which are no justification for divorce, of the
importance of not leaving the issue to the private judgment of the individuals involved, of the importance
of not acting quickly but of attempting 'all manner of reconciliation' and deferring the divorce' while there
is hope of amendment and unity, and of the right of lawfully divorced people to remarry, he directs his
attention to what constitutes a 'right occasion of divorce.' Regarding Christ's naming adultery he writes:
"With the which no doubt he hath not excepted like and greater occasions but understood and
comprehended them therein. For the holy Apostle also did leave infidelity as an occasion of divorce.'
Referring to the Roman emperors Constantine and Justinian, who allowed divorce for such things as
murder and poisoning, he continues: 'Every reasonable man then confides that God did ordain wedlock
for the honesty and wealth of man and not for his main and destruction.'

39 Systema Breve Universae Theologiae, 1659, pp. 631-632.

<a id="ga20-p533"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=535 printed_page=533 -->

#### VII. Conclusion

It is by no means an easy task to determine the extent to which these continental
opinions would have been regarded as similar to or distinct from that of English
Puritanism in general. Beza was widely read and appreciated in the period before the
Westminster Assembly. Plainly, Beza and Maresius go beyond Gouge and perhaps
somewhat beyond Perkins (cf. footnote 24). The extent to which, if any, their
viewpoint differed from that of Ames is more difficult to determine. 40 There is
certainly reason to believe that the divines at Westminster would not have been
unappreciative of the reputation which the Genevan Consistory had gained in defense of
betrothed and married women. 41

In summary, it is difficult to state with absolute confidence the extent of the
latitude which may have existed within the Puritan consensus on divorce and
remarriage, the importance which may or may not have been attached to differences of
interpretation such as in the application of the Pauline privilege to other cases, or the
extent to which the Puritan position, in general, was different from that of continental
divines such as Beza and Maresius. It is to be admitted that none of the Puritan works
surveyed states the case for 'desertion in the broader sense' as bringing with it the right
of divorce and remarriage in as summary a way as did the continental divines.
Nevertheless, available evidence warrants caution in proposing a single interpretation or
application of the Confession's phrase "such wilful desertion as can no way be
remedied."

40 Geesink judges Ames' discussion to be in practical agreement with the Reformed consensus.
Gereformeerde Ethiek, vol. 2, p. 285.

41 G. Lewis, 'Calvinism in Geneva in the time of Calvin and of Beza (1541 - 1605),' ed. M. Prestwich,
International Calvinism 1541 - 1715, Oxford, 1986, p. 49. The Consistory dealt with . . . notorious
drunkards, adulterers, and bullies, with guardians who had misappropriated the inheritance of their wards,
with forced betrothals between grown men and girls under age, and with ill-treated and deserted wives.
Not for nothing was it known (with approval or derision?) as "le paradis des femmes.”; The interesting
case of Galeazzo Caraccioli provides some indication of the flexible way in which cases would be
handled in Calvin's Geneva. Caraccioli, marquis of Vico, nephew of the head of the Roman inquisition
and later Pope Paul IV, married to Victoria Caraffa, the daughter of a duke, and himself appointed
chamberlain by Charles V, became interested in protestantism through the preaching of Peter Martyr
Vermigli and his witnessing of the persecution of Italians under the inquisition. Eventually, after an
inward struggle, he converted. In peril of the inquisition he abandoned his estates and family and came to
Geneva in June, 1551. There he won the respect of Calvin, who later dedicated his commentary on I
Corinthians to him, and became a citizen. His wife remained behind in Italy and at a later meeting at
Vico in 1558 he failed to persuade her to follow him, with their nine children, though there was deep
affection on both sides. Calvin then attempted to arrange for their reunion in a place where both he and
his wife could exercise their religion, but she declined. After this the Council pronounced the marriage
dissolved and in 1560 Caraccioli remarried. J. T. McNeil, the history and character of Calvinism,
Oxford, 1954, p. 184. On the other hand, excommunications for domestic sins far outnumber divorces.
See the appendix, pp. 2394 ff. An excellent example of the caution employed by the Genevan consistory
in judging marital conditions to be intolerable and of their willingness to require victimized spouses to
suffer greatly for the sake of the general inviolability of marriage is found in the correspondence between
the consistory and a protestant woman married to an abusive catholic husband. P. E. Hughes (ed.). The
register of the company of pastors of geneva in the time of Calvin, ET: Grand Rapids, 1966, pp. 193-
198.

<a id="ga20-p534"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=536 printed_page=534 -->

In a paper presented to the Philadelphia Presbytery and included as an appendix to
this report, W. S. Barker draws the following conclusions.

"To a direct question of whether physical abuse could be a grounds for
divorce, the Puritan tradition informing the Westminster Assembly would
have answered, No, not p erse or by itself. William Perkins and William
Ames before the Westminster Assembly, William Gouge as a member of the
Assembly, and Richard Baxter soon after the Assembly are all consistent with
Calvin and Beza and the Genevan tradition in emphasizing adultery as the
essential cause for divorce.

"This same Puritan tradition also saw that under certain circumstances
desertion could be a grounds for divorce, and physical abuse could be the
basis of a desertion, the spouse guilty of the abuse being reputed as the
deserter even though the other may have departed. Before such a situation
could be the grounds for a divorce, however, a sufficient time would have to
expire for the efforts of both church and civil magistrate to seek to achieve a
reconciliation."

In any case, it is important to note both the broad agreement and the narrow scope
both of identifiable disagreement and of remaining questions. The entire Reformed
church held that marriage vows were generally indissoluble, that only a few vicious
crimes against the marital covenant constituted grounds for divorce, that many alleged
grounds lacked Biblical justification, that incompatibility was by no means a ground of
divorce, that every effort was to be made to preserve a marriage and that divorce was
always an unwelcome extremity, that adultery conferred upon the innocent party the
right of divorce and remarriage, and, that, in certain extreme cases, the innocent victims
of marital abandonment are released from their obligations to the marriage. Possible,
though still strictly circumscribed, constructions of marital abandonment and whether in
such cases a right of remarriage is conferred on the innocent spouse seem genuinely
details of interpretation, differences which were insufficient to undermine the Reformed
consensus on marriage and divorce.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. WESTMINSTER CONFESSION: BACKGROUND, TEACHING, AND USE
IN THE CHURCH:
Barker, A rthur. Milton and the Puritan Dilemma: 1641-1660. Canada:
University of Toronto Press, 1942.
Guthrie, Charles J. "The History of Divorce in Scotland." Scottish Historical
Review 5(1910): 39-52.
Knappen, M. M. "Domestic Life." chapter xxv of tudor Puritanism. A Chapter
in the history of Idealism. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press, 1939,
pp. 451-465.
Lachman, David C. "Divorce Reconsidered." The Presbyterian Advocate 1:5-6
(May-June 1991): 1. 17-20
Norskov Olsen, Viggo. The New Testament Logia on Divorce: a study of their
Interpretation From Erasmus to Milton. Tubingen, 1971.

<a id="ga20-p535"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=537 printed_page=535 -->

Owen, Eivion. "Milton and Selden on Divorce." Studies in Philogy 43 (1946):
233-257.
Phillips, Roderick. Putting Asunder. a history of divorce in western Society.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988.
Powell, Chilton Latham . English Domestic Relations, 1482-1653; A Study of
Matrimony and Family Life in Theory and Practice as Revealed by the Literature,
Law, and history of the Period. New York: Columbia University Press, 1917.
Shanley, Mary Lyndon. "Marriage Contract and Social Contract in Seventeenth
Century English Political Thought." Western Political Quarterly 32 (1979).
Smith, David L. "Divorce and Remarriage: From the Early Church to John
Wesley." Trinity Journal 11:2 (Fall 1990): 131-142.

2. WRITINGS OF MEMBERS OF THE ASSEMBLY TOUCHING ON
DIVORCE & REMARRIAGE
[Anonymous]. an answer to a Book, Intituled, the doctrine and discipline of
Divorce. Licensed and endorsed by Joseph Caryl. London, 1644. [Die only
sustained response to any of Milton's divorce tracts' Joseph Caryl was a prominent
member of the Assembly, as well as Licenser of Books of divinity.]
Bridge, William. The Wounded Conscience Cured, the Weak One Strengthened,
and the Doubting Satisfied. London, 1642; reprint, Works, 5:234.
Carter, Thomas. Carters Christian Common Wealth; Or Domesticall Dutyes
Deciphered. London, 1627.
Cawdrey, Daniel. Family Reformation Promoted in a Sermon on Joshua 24:15,
and by short catechisms fit ed for the threefold relations ina family, or 1. Children
and Parents; 2. Servants and Masters; 3. Husband and Wife. London, 1656;
reprint anthology of presbyterian and reformed Literature. Volume 4. Dallas,
TX: Naphtali Press, pp. 54-73.
G ataker, Thomas. Marriage Duties Briefly Couched together; out of Colossians,
3.18,19. London, 1920.
. A Wife in Deed. a sermon concerning the matter of Marriage. London,
1624.
Gouge, William. of domestic al Duties. London: Printed by John Haviland,
1622.
Palmer, Herbert. the glass e of gods providence towards his faithful Ones.
London, 1644.
. Scripture and Reason Pleaded for Defensive Armes. London, 1643.
Seldon, John. Uxor Ebraica. London, 1646.

<a id="ga20-p536"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=538 printed_page=536 -->

CHAPTER 2

SCRIPTURAL PERSPECTIVE ON DIVORCE AND REMARRIAGE

I. Issues Concerning Divorce and Remarriage

A. What our denominational heritage has said about marriage

There has been a general consensus among Reformed believers regarding the nature and
purpose of marriage. It is reflected in this statement of the RPCES General Synod Minutes of
May 18,1973:

"Marriage is the unique one-flesh relationship of a man and woman joined together
by God in a union that He wills to be both permanent and exclusive, binding the
couple to each other in a life-long companionship of common life and conjugal
love. (Gen. 2:23-24, Matt. 19:4-8, Rom. 7:2-3)."'

Scripture uses covenantal language to describe marriage: "The Lord has been witness
between you and the wife of your youth to whom you have been faithless, although she is
your companion and your wife by covenant" (Mai. 2:14; cf. Prov. 2:17). When Scripture
says that a man shall "cleave" to his wife (Gen. 2:24), it is using a covenantal term used
elsewhere to express the way the Israelites were to cleave with affection and loyalty to the
Lord (Deut. 10:20; 11:22; 13:4; 30:20; Josh. 22:5; 23:8). Marriage is often used as an
analogy in the Old Testament of God's covenant relation with Israel and in the New
Testament of Christ's relationship with the Church. This covenantal relation between man
and woman was intended by God to be loving, loyal and permanent.

Consequently, according to those same General Synod minutes: "It is the duty of
husband and wife to maintain the unity and integrity of their marriage of cohabitation and
coition. (Cf. Larger Catechism, Q.138). Should separation occur, reconciliation is to be
sought. ( I Cor. 7:10-11)."2

B. What our denominational heritage has said about divorce and remarriage

In light of our view of marriage, it seems incongruous to talk about divorce and
remarriage. Nevertheless, most of us would likely agree with most, if not all, of this
statement of the General Synod Minutes:

"Divorce is therefore always an abnormality arising out of human sinfulness. It was
tolerated in the civil legislation of the Old Testament, but the Mosaic provision was
given only 'for the hardness of your hearts.' (Deut. 24:1-4, Matt. 19:3-8). The civil

1 "Report of Study Committee on Divorce and Remarriage," Documents of Synod: Study Papers and Actions
of the Reformed Presbyterian Church, Evangelical Synod - 1965-1982, Paul R. Gilchrist, ed., New Castle, 1982,
p.200.

2 Ibid.

<a id="ga20-p537"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=539 printed_page=537 -->

legislation took into account in this matter the insubordination to the will of God
characteristic of unbelieving Israel.

"In the New Testament Jesus calls his people to faithfulness to the original will
of God for marriage as expressed in the creation ordinance. (Matt. 5:31, 32,19:3-8).
The apostle Paul presses this teaching of our Lord upon the early Christian
community, (I Cor. 7:10-11). The original ideal of marriage is to be maintained by
the people of God in this age of the fullness of God's saving blessing.

"This is not to say that divorce is never sanctioned in the New Testament. But it is
only sanctioned in circumstances of grave infidelity — adultery and willful,
irremediable desertion (Matt. 5:32, 19:9; I Cor. 7:15. Cf. Confession of Faith,
XXIV, v-vi). These are definitive actions that strike the exclusiveness of the
marriage bond, malicious desertion its permanence. Both radically affect the one-
flesh union and so provide 'cause sufficient of dissolving the bond of marriage.

"The 'innocent party' [i.e., offended party] in such circumstances is free to
remarry...Scripture does not forbid the remarriage of the 'guilty party' in such cases.
Where there is genuine conversion, evidenced by sincere and heart-felt repentance
and faith in Christ, the church, after providing pastoral counseling and instruction in
the biblical teaching concerning marriage, may approve remarriage in the Lord ."3

C. What views may be found today within the evangelical-reformed community
regarding divorce and remarriage

The above paragraphs taken from the RPCES General Synod Minutes of 1973 represent
the consensus of our tradition on the questions of divorce and remarriage. However, in our
day a variety of views have presented themselves and may be grouped in the following way.

1. No divorce, no remarriage

Some believers argue that there are no legitimate divorces at all and only death dissolves
the marriage bond. The exception clause in Matthew is characteristically interpreted in one of
two ways.

View #1: It refers to premarital unchastity during betrothal. If the betrothed
proved unfaithful during that period or was discovered on the first night of marriage
not to be a virgin, then the contract could be broken. (Cf. J. Dwight Pentecost, J.M.
Boice).4

View #2: It refers to unlawful incestuous marriages, i.e., marriages within the
prohibited degrees as proscribed in Leviticus 18:6-18. (Cf. Laney, C.C. Ryrie).5

3 Ibid., pp. 200-201.

4 J. Dwight Pentecost, the words and works of jesus Christ, Grand Rapids,. 1981, pp. 354-358. J. M. Boice,
"The Biblical View of Divorce," Eternity, Dec. 1970, pp. 19-21.

<a id="ga20-p538"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=540 printed_page=538 -->

Gordon Wenham holds a slight variation of this view. Jesus' exception clause permitted
divorce in the sense of separation, but marriage is a permanent relationship whether we get a
divorce or not. In God's eyes a divorced person is still married to the former spouse. Thus
remarriage following divorce for any reason constitutes adultery. The only option for a
divorced person is to be reconciled or to remain single.6 Common to all these views is the
assumption that remarriage after divorce is not allowed.

2. Strictly limited grounds for divorce, and for remarriage

The general consensus among Reformed believers is the view that the Bible neither
condones nor commands divorce, but rather permits and regulates divorce due to sin.
However, a person can divorce only for adultery and separation of an unbelieving spouse. In
the words of the Westminster Confession of Faith: "...nothing but adultery, or such wilful
desertion as can no way be remedied by the church or civil magistrate, is cause sufficient of
dissolving the bond of marriage" (24:6).7

John Stott and John Murray are among those who insist that such permission is given
only in negative and reluctant terms. According to Stott:

"Only if a person divorces his partner on the ground of marital unfaithfulness is his
remarriage not adulterous. Only if the unbeliever insists on leaving is the believer
'not bound."'8

Common to all those who hold this view is the idea that these same limited grounds
would be legitimate for remarriage too.

3. Broader grounds for divorce, and for remarriage

Still other believers hold the view that the major verses under question, Matthew 19 and
I Corinthians 7, should be interpreted with more latitude.

a. David Atkinson holds that there are sins otherthatfornication whichmay by their
gross and persistent nature break the marriage covenant just as much as fornication,
and are therefore grounds for divorce.9

5 J. Carl Laney, The Divorce Myth: a biblical examination of divorce and Remarriage, Minneapolis, 1981, pp.
71-78. C. C. Ryrie, the place of women in the Church, New York, 1958, pp. 43-48. See also William A. Heth
and Gordon J. Wenham, Jesus and Divorce: The Problem with the Evangelical Consensus, Nashville, 1984, pp.
154-160.

6 Gordon Wenham, The Biblical View of Marriage and Divorce, No. 3, New Testament Teaching," Third Way,
London, Nov. 17,1977, pp. 7-9.

7 the confession of Faith, Brevard, North Carolina, 1983, p. 69. (Chapter 24.6).

8 John Stott, Involvement, Vol. 2, Social and Sexual Relationships in the Modern World, Old Tappan, NJ, 1985,
p. 177. Cf. John Murray, Divorce, Philadelphia, 1961, pp. 20-21.

9 David Atkinson, To Have and To Hold, Grand Rapids, 1979, Chapter 5, pp. 134 ff.

<a id="ga20-p539"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=541 printed_page=539 -->

b. Greg Bahnsen argues that porneia (fornication) in Matthew 19 involves more than
sexual immorality; it should be interpreted as including any violations of the
essential commitments of the marriage covenant, including spousal abuse or the
refusal to provide protection and sustenance necessary for daily living .10

c. David Clowney believes that the New Testament writers were not intending to give
us an exhaustive list of exceptions for divorce; we should view the texts on divorce
as examples of breaking the marriage covenant and seek to apply the examples to
particular situations such as persistent physical abuse, attempts on the life of a
spouse, and so forth.11

These views differ from the liberal Protestant view of "no fault" divorce, or divorce on
merely humanistic grounds such as "incompatibility." As Clowney writes: "To seek to
multiply such exceptions would be perverse, and precisely contrary to the intention of the
Lord and his apostles."12 Common to these views is the idea that appropriate grounds for
divorce would allow for remarriage.

D. Are we to understand that Scripture indeed allows for divorce?

1. Divorce was permitted in Scripture

It must be conceded, writes John Murray, that divorce was practiced. Such practice is
found in many passages of Scripture (Ex. 21:10-11; Lev. 21:7, 14; 22:13; Nu. 30:9(10); Deut.
22:19, 29; 24:1-4; cf. Ezra 9-10; Neh. 9:2, 13:23ff; Isa. 50:1; Jer. 3:1; Ez 44:22), and under
certain circumstances proves to be "permanently valid and inviolable...It is also conceded that
divorce was permitted or tolerated" and "the penalty of civil or ecclesiastical ostracism was
not attached to it." But it is very necessary to distinguish, continues Murray, "between this
sufferance or toleration, on the one hand, and divine approval or sanction, on the
other...Permission, sufferance, toleration was granted. But underlying this very notion is the
idea of wrong ."13

To say that God intended for marriage never to be broken does not mean that the
marriage union is unbreakable. In some instances, God breaks it by death. For Paul
specifically says that the surviving spouse is free to remarry again (I Cor. 7:39, cf. Rom.
7:2f.). Moreover, younger widows are even encouraged to do so (I Tim. 5:14; cf. I Cor. 7:8-
9).

10 Greg Bahnsen, "Theses of Divorce and Spousal A buse," Unpublished paper.

11 David Clowney, "An argument for the conclusion that abuse could provide biblically legitimate grounds for
divorce," Unpublished paper.

12 Ibid.

13 Murray, Divorce , pp. 8-9.

<a id="ga20-p540"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=542 printed_page=540 -->

2. Divorce dissolved a marriage in Scripture

That divorce was more than a separation in Scripture is noted by Charles Hodge:

"Divorce is not a mere separation...Divorce annuls the marriage contract so that the
parties are no longer man and wife. They stand henceforth to each other in the
same relation as they were before marriage."14

A study of the terms for divorce in Scripture support the view that divorce is not merely
a separation. The Old Testament term for divorce which occurs in the phrase "bill of divorce"
(Deut. 24; Isa. 50:1; Jer. 3:8) means "to cut off, to hew off (kerithuth). Other Old Testament
words are used which mean to "expel, put away" (garash) or to "dismiss, send away, let go,
put away" (shalach). The New Testament has similar words in the Greek which mean the
same thing: "to set free, release, dismiss, send away" (apoluo), "to separate, divide"
(chorizo), and "to let go, send away" (aphiemi). The notion of severance or of being cut off is
implied within the contextual use of these terms, and it would be difficult to argue that the
terms do not connote a total break in marital obligations.

A strong argument may be made as well from customs in Jesus' day. Christ allowed for
a bill of divorce to be given in the case of porneia. The essential text of such a bill of divorce
recorded in the Mishnah is , "Lo, thou art free to marry any man." The Mishnah goes on to
record the wording of Rabbi Judah: "Let this be from me thy writ of divorce and letter of
dismissal and deed of liberation, that thou mayest marry whatsoever man thou wilt."15
Whether or not this was the divorce bill text envisioned by Deuteronomy 24:1 is not germain.
Christ was commenting on current custom and application of that law. In other words, in
Jesus' day, divorce carried with it the right to remarriage, and that would have been
understood in their discussions.

It is clearly God's will that marriage be permanent. But it is obviously possible that
marriage can be broken. Loraine Boettner clarifies this for us by providing a delightful
illustration apparently written by Dr. Geerhardus Vos:

"We may have on our parlor table a beautiful and costly vase. it ought to be
handled carefully. it ought not to be broken. It was not made to be smashed; it was
made to exist as a thing of beauty and grace. But it is not impossible to break it.
And if a member of the family breaks it through carelessness, orin a fit of temper
smashes it deliberately, there is nothing to do but sweep up the broken fragments
and dispose of them. We will not say, 'This vase was not intended to be broken;
therefore it is impossible to break it; the vase is unbreakable; therefore in spite of
the fact that it lies in shattered fragments on the floor, we will not throw it away; we
will keep it forever.’ No one would say that about a broken vase; yet that is
substantially the argument of those who say that the marriage bond is 'indissoluble’
and unbreakable.’"16

14 Charles Hodge, Systematic Theology, Vol. Ill, London, 1961, p. 391.

15 Gittin 9:3.

<a id="ga20-p541"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=543 printed_page=541 -->

E. Does the evidence that divorce ends marriage mean that God looks favorably
at divorce?

Scripture speaks unmistakably about God's repugnance at divorce. One passage is quite
clear about this.

Malachi 2:13-16

13) "And this is another thing you do: you cover the altar of the LORD with tears, with
weeping and with groaning, because He no longer regards the offering or accepts it with
favor from your hand. 14) Yet you say, 'For what reason?’ Because the LORD has been
a witness between you and the wife of your youth, against whom you have dealt
treacherously, though she is your companion and your wife by covenant.
15) But not one has done so who has a remnant of the Spirit. And what did that one do
while he was seeking a godly offspring? Take heed then, to your spirit, and let no one
deal treacherously against the wife of your youth.
16) 'For I hate divorce,’ says the LORD, the God of Israel, 'and him who covers his
garment with wrong,’ says the LORD of hosts. 'S o take heed to your spirit, that you do
not deal treacherously.’"

In this profound passage, Malachi is pointing out one of the reasons why God has
withheld His blessing from Israel. Skillfully using a question-and-answer method, Malachi
points out that the people were weeping and wailing at God’s altar because He was no longer
responding to them. Yet the people ask, "Why doesn't God respond?" Malachi is not afraid
to point his finger at the cause: "Because the LORD has been a witness between you and the
wife of your youth, against whom you have dealt treacherously...” (In verses 10-12, Malachi
had just accused them of marrying foreign women. Apparently they were doing so by
divorcing their wives, a practice not unknown to Christians today.)

Notice how God calls their divorces "dealing treacherously,” a verb which is repeated
three times in these four verses. Twice he refers to the divorced woman as "the wife of thy
youth," appealing no doubt to the heart of the husbands. Malachi goes on to refer to the first
wife as "your companion and your wife by covenant.” The term companion does not simply
refer to a 'partner' or 'associate,' terms which denote a rather loose relationship. Rather, it is
an intense term meaning 'knit together’ and connotes an unusually close joining or bonding.
It fits in beautifully with the picture of Genesis 2:24, and the term "Covenant of
Companionship" describes perfectly the marriage covenant.

Malachi then reminds them that what they have done in putting away their wives is
contrary to what would be done by the true Israelite who has the remnant of the Spirit. So,
"take heed then, to your spirit, and let no one deal treacherously against the wife of your
youth."

Then come those powerful words, "For I hate divorce," which is the translation of the
NASV. There is no doubt that God hates divorce, for the entire context of this passage

16 Loraine Boettner, Divorce, Nutley, NJ, 1972, p. 13.

<a id="ga20-p542"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=544 printed_page=542 -->

conveys the truth that the LORD views it as an act of treachery. But there is a major problem
of translation with this verse, a problem the NASV is aware of , for a marginal note reads:
"Lit., He hates." A more straightforward translation of the Hebrew, confirmed by the LXX,
reads:
"If [anyone] hating [his wife] divorces [her],
Says the LORD God of Israel,
Then violence covers his garment,
Says the LORD of hosts."

Dr. David C. Jones makes a most compelling case for this translation, based on a careful
analysis of both the Hebrew and the Greek LXX. Does this mean that God does not hate
divorce? Not at all, for as Dr. Jones points out in his concluding paragraph:

"Finally, so far from weakening the Lord's protest against marital infidelity, the
prophetic word against divorce is rendered more forceful by being more definite.
Divorce for 'hatred' is a radical breach of fidelity; it is 'violence' against the
companion to whom one has been joined in marriage. It therefore stands
condemned by the God of justice, mercy, and troth."17

n. Consideration of Major Scripture Passages

As we begin our exposition of Scripture, we should remember that every passage
becomes a battle ground for every view. Our purpose will be in each passage first to provide
a clear explanation of what the passage teaches, and second to show how different views
interpret that passage.

A. Deuteronomy 24:1-4

1) "When a man takes a wife and marries her, and it happens that she finds no favor
in his eyes because he has found some indecency in her, and he writes her a
certificate of divorce and puts it in her hand and sends her out from his house, 2)
and she leaves his house and goes and becomes another man's wife, 3) and if the
latter husband turns against her and writes her a certificate of divorce and puts it in
her hand and sends her out of his house, or if the latter husband dies who took her to
be his wife, 4) then her former husband who sent her away is not allowed to take
her again to be his wife, since she has been defiled; for that is an abomination
before the Lord, and you shall not bring sin on the land which the Lord your God
gives you as an inheritance."

1. Is Moses giving a command to divorce?

Many assume the KJV translation of verse 1, "When a man hath taken a wife, and
married her, and it come to pass that she finds no favour in his eyes, because he hath found
some uncleanness in her: then let him write her a bill of divorcement...” This translation
makes it sound like Moses is commanding divorce.

17 David C. Jones, "Malachi on Divorce," Presbyterion: Covenant Seminary Review, 15 (1989), pp.1-6.

<a id="ga20-p543"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=545 printed_page=543 -->

However, that is not the best translation. A careful analysis of the intended structure of
this lengthy sentence in Hebrew is crucial for a proper understanding. The first three verses
are all part of a compound protasis (or conditional part of the sentence), while the fourth verse
contains the apodosis (or consequence). In other words, we should understand the passage in
this way: "If a man divorces his wife, and if he gives her a certificate, and if she leaves and
remarries, and if her second husband divorces her or dies, then her first husband may not
marry her again." Thus we learn:

Lesson #1: Moses is not instituting divorce in this passage. He deals only indirectly
with divorce and remarriage, and his main purpose is to prohibit the reunion of partners
after divorce and remarriage has taken place.

Lesson #2: Deuteronomy is in some sense trying to regulate divorce in what appears to
be a situation which has gotten out of hand. Divorce appears as an established custom
which is neither commanded nor condoned in this passage.

This is in agreement with the rest of Mosaic Law. Mosaic Law takes the custom of
divorce for granted (Lev. 21:7, 14: 22:13; Nu. 30:9; Dt. 22:19, 29); it does not institute
divorce, but regulates it to limit and preclude its abuse. In two cases in Scripture, the right of
divorce for the offended spouse is withheld, viz. where a man slanders his newly-married
wife as unchaste, or seduces her before marriage (Dt. 22:19, 29).

2. What does the phrase "some indecency" mean?

Does "some indecency" refer merely to a personal dislike of the husband, or to a
biblically shameful act justifying the permission for a divorce? Can a word study give us an
exact nuance on which we can all agree?

The Hebrew words are erwath dabar. They are translated in the KJV as "some
uncleanness," and in the NIV as "something indecent." Erwath is commonly translated
"nakedness," and is used in Old Testament contexts of shameful exposure, indecency, or
improper behavior having to do with sex.18 Dabar is simply translated as "something" or
"thing" in this context. Hence, the literal translation would be "nakedness of the thing."

The term erwath used alone clearly had a prominent sexual nuance. That illicit sexual
sin is intimated in Deut. 24 seems probable due to two Old Testament passages which use
Deut. 24:1-4 as a basis. The first passage is Jeremiah 3:1 ff:

"God says, If a husband divorces his wife, and she goes from him, and belongs to
another man, will he still return to her? Will not that land be completely polluted?
But you are a harlot with many lovers; yet you turn to Me, declares the
Lord...[Jeremiah 3:8-9 expands]...And I saw that for all the adulteries of faithless
Israel, i had sent her away and given hera writ of divorce, yet her treacherous sister
Judah did not fear; but she went and was a harlot also. And it came about because

18 F. Brown, S. R. Driver, and C. A, Briggs, hebrew and english lexicon of the old Testament, Oxford, 1962,
p. 789.

<a id="ga20-p544"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=546 printed_page=544 -->

of the lightness of her harlotry, that she polluted the land and committed adultery
with stones and trees."

The second passage is Isaiah 50:1, where we read:

"Thus says the Lord, Where is the certificate of divorce, by which I have sent your
mother away? Or to whom of My creditors did I sell you? Behold, you were sold for your
iniquities, and for your transgressions your mother was sent away." Comparing these passages
with Deut. 24, the "indecency" would appear to be a heinous sin, one which would involve
sexual immorality.

However, the uses of erwath in Scripture are not limited to sexual immorality. It can
also refer to perversity (I Sam. 20:30), to a dishonor for authority (Ezra 4:14), and to public
shame (Isa. 20:4). The exact phrase erwath dabar occurs elsewhere only in Deut. 23:14
where it refers to human excrement left in Israel's camp, an uncleanness that would repulse
God.

This broader use of erwath introduces us to a major problem in the divorce and
remarriage controversy. It is the same problem we face when we attempt to define the Greek
term porneia in Jesus' exception clause (Matt. 19:9). it is very difficult to comet oa
consensus on the precise distinction or subtlety of "some indecency."

It was difficult in Jesus' day. The school of Shammai regarded it as adultery, whereas
the school of Hillel saw it as referring to anything that displeased the husband. Likewise,
today, some wish to attribute a narrower, and others a more broad, meaning to erwath dabar.
This divergence of views may be seen by comparing prominent current interpretations of
Deuteronomy 24:1-4.

3. Modern interpreters differ

William A. Heth and Gordon J. Wenham in their book, Jesus and Divorce, contend that
the first three verses are really secondary to the main thrust of the passage which is verse four.
Knowing the precise nuances of erwath dabar is not that important. The fact that the first
husband legally divorced his wife is acknowledged and the second marriage is also
considered legal. The crux of the law is that the wife's remarriage to her first husband is
forbidden! Why? Because the "one-flesh" bond of their first marriage was never really
dissolved by their legal divorce and remarriage. Consequently, were the wife to remarry her
first husband, she would have committed a form of incest, which in Lev. 18 we are told is an
abomination to the Lord and defiles the land. Therefore, conclude Heth and Wenham, Deut.
24 does not allow a "dissolution divorce" in which remarriage can take place .19

Jay Adams in his book, Marriage, Divorce, and Remarriage in the Bible, holds that
Deut. 24:1-3 (the protasis) tells of a wife who finds "no favor" in her husband's eyes because
of "some indecency" he finds in her. So the husband hands her a bill of divorce, going
through a genuine divorce proceeding which in effect annulled her marriage obligations to
him and set her free to marry another man, which she does. Yet the text goes on to say that

19 Heth and Wenham, Jesus and Divorce, pp. 106-111.

<a id="ga20-p545"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=547 printed_page=545 -->

she cannot remarry her first husband because she has been "defiled" and it is an abomination
to the Lord and would bring sin on the land. Clearly, the judgmental language, used
elsewhere in such contexts as Lev. 18, supposes gross sexual sins among the people. She was
"defiled” apparently due to her entrance into the second marriage, not wrong in itself, but
wrong when following a bad divorce. Why was it a bad divorce? Because "some indecency"
was interpreted broadly by the husband and the divorce was not biblically justified .20

John Murray in his book, Divorce, begins his discussion of the meaning of "some
indecency" by saying: "It has to be admitted that it is exceedingly difficult if not precarious
to be certain as to what the 'unseemly thing' really was." He concludes that there was no
evidence to show that in Deut. 24 it refers to adultery or an act of sexual uncleanness. On the
other hand, he is not willing to agree with Hillel's loose interpretation. Murray concludes that
it refers to something very shameful: "While falling short of illicit sexual intercourse it may
well be that the indecency consisted in some kind of shameful conduct connected with sex
life. Or it may have been some other kind of impropriety worthy of censure on the part of the
husband."21

This variety of interpretation reminds us that precious little can be gained from a study of
Deut. 24:1-4. It was precisely because of its vagueness that it was being debated in Jesus'
day. In any case, what we have here is the regulation of divorce, not its institution or
encouragement. Moreover, the broad weight of the evidence seems to favor a generally
sexual connotation for erwath dabar, although it is very difficult to conclude with any
certainty. We can't imagine that anyone's view is going to rest on the interpretation of this
particular passage. The real issue centers on an interpretation of the New Testament
passages.

Three relevant principles can be derived from this passage however. First, it
establishes the practice of making divorces official and legal instead of leaving them de facto.
Second, it expresses God's desire that a woman be protected from being pulled back and forth
by an impulsive husband. Third, it discourages divorce and especially the finalization of
divorce via remarriage by making it unlawful to return to one's original spouse after
remarriage.

4. Proceeding to the New Testament passages

All three synoptics provide us with Jesus' own teaching on marriage, divorce and
remarriage. The passages vary in precise detail, but they do not present contradictory views
of what Jesus taught, they complement each other, and provide a broader picture of what
Jesus taught than if we had only one passage.

We will first examine Matthew 5:31-32, and then Luke 16:18. Matthew 19:3-9 and
Mark 10:2-11 will be considered jointly. Once we have looked at all the passages in the
Gospels, we will return to consider the exception clauses in Matthew and the meaning of
porneia (sexual immorality). Then we will proceed on to consider 1 Corinthians 7.

20 Jay E. Adams, Marriage, Divorce, and Remarriage in the Bible, Grand Rapids, 1980, pp. 60-69.

21 John Murray, Divorce, pp, 9-16.

<a id="ga20-p546"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=548 printed_page=546 -->

B. Matthew 5:31-32

31) "And it was said, 'whoever divorces his wife, let him give her a certificate of
dismissal;' 32) but I say to you that everyone who divorces his wife except for the
cause of unchastity, makes her commit adultery; and whoever marries a divorced
woman commits adultery."

1. The rabbinic perversion of Deuteronomy 24

Jesus is not quoting Deuteronomy 24 verbatim, but is stating a misleading abbreviation
or distortion of that passage in the oral teaching of the Pharisees. This oral teaching gives the
impression that divorce was readily permissible; all one had to do was to go through the
formality of handing over a certificate of divorce. (Jewish sources confirm that divorce was
relatively easy to obtain.)

It seems likely that Jesus is quoting the teaching of the school of Hillel, that school
which taught a more lax view of divorce. For them, marriage was viewed as a contract that
could be broken. By focusing on the steps taken in obtaining a divorce, they had sidestepped
the intent of the law, that divorce for unwarranted reasons is wrong.

2. Jesus' correction of the rabbinic perversion

Jesus responds to the distorted view of the rabbis by first saying that "everyone who
divorces his wife except for the cause of un chastity makes her commit adultery..." Then he
adds,' "and whoever marries a divorced woman commits adultery." Concerning his response,
we make these observations.

First, there is the presence of an exception clause, "except for the cause of unchastity."
Because this clause is at the center of debate, we have reserved for a later section the
discussion of what it means and how it is to be applied., However, at present we may point
out the obvious, that if a man divorces his wife "for the cause of unchastity," he is not thereby
"making her commit adultery." For she has already done so and he is free from that charge.

Second, because the verb "to commit adultery" is an aorist passive infinitive, some
scholars prefer to interpret the clause "stigmatizes her as an adulteress" (even though it is not
so).22 But that view is to be rejected. The NIV "causes her to become an adulteress," or the
NASV "makes her commit adultery" (which we are using) provides a more natural
translation. The aorist passive form serves simply to accent the fact that she is the victim.

Third, the question naturally arises, "How is the divorced wife caused to commit
adultery?" By divorcing his wife, the man is virtually forcing her to be remarried. The plight
of the divorced wife was often desperate in Jesus' day, and divorce would inevitably lead to
remarriage if there was any possibility. But how would that be called adultery? The clear

22 For example, R. C. H. Lenski, interpretation of St. Matthew's Gospel, Columbus, 1932, pp. 226 ff. For an
extensive analysis of the use of the verb moicheo (to commit adultery) in this passage, see John Murray,
Divorce, p. 21, n. 2.

<a id="ga20-p547"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=549 printed_page=547 -->

implication is that the wife would be having sexual relations with a person other than the one
with whom she ought to be having sex. It would constitute marital unfaithfulness. While the
divorce from a human point of view did break the former marital obligations, from God's
point of view it never should have happened. In other words, when there is no biblical
warrant to be ina divorced state, those who bring about that divorce are causing their partners
to commit adultery.

Fourth, the emphasis of Jesus' statement, therefore, is on the guilt of the husband who
divorces his wife for an unbiblical reason. For he is being held responsible for creating a
situation in which she cannot remarry without committing adultery. Some suppose that the
real problem was not the divorce itself, but that to which the divorce led, the remarriage of the
wife. But this text underlines the husband's responsibility for the act. He victimizes her, and
causes her to bean adulteress. The stigma she bears and the position into which she is placed
have been imposed on her by the sin of the husband who initiates and executes the divorce.
(Today, wives initiate divorces regularly, and the same principle applies to them as well.)

Fifth, Jesus goes on to say that "whoever marries a divorced woman commits adultery."
Jesus' words indicate what happens when humans break up a marriage without the warrant of
the exception clause. His words are related to that fact alone and do not deal with the status
of the divorced woman when her previous husband remarries (see elsewhere in our study).

Sixth, we simply point out that the emphasis in this text should not be on the fact that
there is an exception, but rather that there is only one exception. There is only one legitimate
reason why the husband may be considered as not sinning by putting away his wife. As John
Murray points out, "Preoccupation with the one exception should never be permitted to
obscure the force of the negation of all others."23 Nor are we led to believe that a husband is
"obliged" to divorce his wife in the case of sexual immorality. All that the text says is that if
he does divorce her for that reason, he is not implicated in the sin of causing her to commit
adultery.

3. Interpretations influenced by the context of Matthew 5, the Sermon on the
Mount

Some have argued that, because of the immediate context of the Sermon on the Mount,
our text is a "hard saying" of Jesus, and as such is to be understood as "haggadic
argumentation" - a statement intended to shock Jews out of their complacency over divorce,
and not as halakic, prescriptive instruction. For example, just prior to this passage in Matt.
5:29, Jesus talks about plucking out the right eye that causes one to sin. That was not meant
to be taken as a literal legal prescription, they say, but as a deliberately shocking statement
intended to challenge existing attitudes. Then they insist that the same is true of the divorce
statement.24

23 John Murray, Divorce, p. 21.

24 For example, M. J. Down, "The Sayings of Jesus About Marriage and Divorce," Expository Times, 95.11
(1984), p. 333.

<a id="ga20-p548"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=550 printed_page=548 -->

Our response is that although Jesus was concerned about the spirit of the law in Matthew
5, he clearly seems to be setting his own authoritative commentary and guidelines over
against the legal prescription of the oral tradition. He obviously desires not just to affect their
attitudes, but also to govern their external behavior. He was discouraging divorce in the
strongest terms as a specific form of behavior.

Others hold that, since Jesus' statement on divorce occurs in the Sermon on the Mount,
we must interpret it as being more stringent than the views of the scribes and Pharisees. For
Jesus had said, "... unless your righteousness surpasses that of the scribes and Pharisees, you
shall not enter the kingdom of heaven" (Matt 5:20). They argue that if Jesus were allowing
for remarriage after divorce for adultery, then Jesus "would be siding with the conservative
school of Shammai which allowed divorce only in the case of adultery," and, if so, then"Jesus'
teaching did not rise above that of Shammai and the Pharisees, contrary to His usual
pattem...[as] Christ customarily rebuked the superficiality of the Pharisees with His own more
stringent interpretation of the Law ."25 According to this point of view, therefore, Jesus'
teaching was more stringent by not allowing for remarriage.

In response, we would point out that Jesus' statement that their righteousness must
exceed that of the scribes and Pharisees is not necessarily taken to mean that their standards
must in every instance be more stringent. As David Jones notes:

"Jesus' interpretation of the Law is not invariably more stringent than that of the
Pharisees. Indeed, sometimes the opposite is the case. Responding to the Pharisees'
stringent interpretation of the fourth commandment, Jesus twice reproves them for
failure to incorporate into their hermeneutic the principle of Hosea 6 :6: 'I desire
mercy, not sacrifice' (Mt. 9:13, 12:7)...Rigorous standards are not necessarily
righteous; it is not godly to be more strict than God .26

Moreover, in the Sermon on the Mount, Jesus is not saying that the great concern the
Pharisees displayed for the details of observance was okay as far as it went, it just didn't go
far enough; therefore they must supplement it by going further. Rather, as John Murray
explains in his book principles of Conduct:

"What Jesus is saying is that the righteousness of the scribes, notwithstanding its
meticulous adherence to the minutiae, does not begin to qualify for the kingdom of
heaven; it has no affinity with the demands of the kingdom of heaven. This is so
not because the kingdom of heaven does not demand righteousness, not because it
is indifferent to the minutiae of divine prescription, but because the demands of the
kingdom of heaven are far greater than anything that ever enters into the conception
of the scribes and Pharisees. They have not begun to reckon with the demands of
the kingdom of heaven. Paradoxically, it was their concern for detail that led them

25 Laney, The Divorce Myth , pp. 67-68.

26 David C. Jones, in his paper submitted to the Eighteenth General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America as part of the Ad-Hoc Committee on Marriage, Divorce, and Remarriage, entitled, "The Westminster
Confession on Divorce and Remarriage," p. 25.

<a id="ga20-p549"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=551 printed_page=549 -->

to miss the whole genius of kingdom righteousness; the detail was not the detail of
divine prescription. They made void the law of God by their own traditions."27

Murray concludes that "the righteousness that exceeds that of the scribes and Pharisees is
therefore that of character and behavior," not that of extending the details .28

C. Luke 16:17-18

17) "But it is easier for heaven and earth to pass away than for one stroke of a letter
of the Law to fail. 18) Every one who divorces his wife and marries another
commits adultery; and he who marries one who is divorced from a husband
commits adultery."

The context of Luke 16:18 is similar to that of Matthew 5:32. Jesus has just charged the
Pharisees with hypocrisy, as those "who justify yourselves in the sight of men, but God knows
your hearts..."(v. 15). He states that not even one stroke of the Law will fail (v.17), implying
this to be the case in spite of their lax attitudes to the Law. Then he applies this to their view
of divorce.

The divorce text of Luke 16:18 is quite similar to that of Matt. 5:32, except that whereas
the latter passage reads "everyone who divorces his wife except for the cause of unchastity
makes her commit adultery," Luke reads "everyone who divorces his wife and marries
another (heteros) commits adultery." Matthew speaks only of a divorce which causes the
wife to commit adultery, but Luke speaks of a man divorcing and remarrying thereby himself
committing adultery. Also, Luke omits the exception clause.

How do we understand the differences? First, we do not believe Jesus is contradicting
himself. Luke 16:18 serves to clarify and reinforce Jesus' teaching in Matt. 5:32. According
to Matt. 5:32, when a man divorces his wife but does not remarry, he is not committing
adultery, but he is to be held accountable for causing his wife to commit adultery if she
remarries. But in Luke 16:18, if a husband divorces his wife and then remarries, he is
committing adultery.

Apparently divorce in Jesus' day was an act which frequently had as its object the
removal of the wife to make room for another woman. This was the problem Moses was
facing in Deut. 24 (cf. Ex. 34:11-16; Deut. 7:1-5), Ezra was facing in Ezra 9-10 (cf. Neh.
10:30; 13:23-30), and Malachi was facing in Mai. 2:10-17. It is at the heart of the problem
we face today. In divorcing their wives to make room for others, they had made the Law of
God void.

But how can Christ's teachings in Luke and in Matthew be reconciled when Matthew
includes the exception clause but Luke does not? This should not be seen as a great
difficulty. It is a regular feature of ethical commands or doctrinal pronouncements in the
Scripture to be stated in a general form which sounds absolute, taken in and of itself, but

27 John Murray, principles of Conduct, Grand Rapids, 1978, pp. 155.

28 Ibid., p. 156

<a id="ga20-p550"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=552 printed_page=550 -->

which are modified or qualified in some way in another, more detailed, consideration of the
same subject. For example, the sixth commandment, "Thou shalt not kill" is qualified in
many ways in other places of the law (e.g. the commands concerning capital punishment and
war); the fourth commandment prohibiting work on the Sabbath day is also qualified (see
Mat. 12:1-5); Jesus' instruction concerning prayer, "Whatever you ask in My name, I will do
it" (John 14:13-14) is qualified elsewhere in several ways (e.g. I John 5:14); Paul's command
not to do anything that might make men stumble (I Cor. 10:32-33) is qualified by Jesus'
example with the Pharisees (Mat. 12:1-14; Luke 13:10-17; 14:1-6); the commands to obey
parents and civil authorities are qualified as well (Acts 5:29). Thus the fact that Jesus'
command is absolute in Luke 16 should not prevent us from admitting the qualifications He
places on His instructions when He gives them in Mat. 5 and 19."

D. Matthew 19:3-9 [Mark 10:2-11]

3) "And some Pharisees came to Him, testing Him, and saying, 'Is it lawful for a
man to divorce his wife for any cause at all?" 4) And He answered and said, 'Have
you not read, that He who created them from the beginning MADE THEM MALE
AND FEMALE, 5) and said FOR THIS CAUSE A MAN SHALL LEAVE HIS
FATHER AND MOTHER, AND SHALL CLEAVE TO HIS WIFE; AND THE
TWO SHALL BECOME ONE FLESH? 6) Consequently they are no more two,
but one flesh. What therefore God has joined together, let no man separate.’ 7)
They said to Him, 'Why then did Moses command to give her a certificate and
divorce her?’ He said to them, 'Because of your hardness of heart, Moses permitted
you to divorce your wives; but from the beginning it has not been this way. 9) And
I say to you, whoever divorces his wife, except for immorality, and marries another
commits adultery.’"

There is no need to consider Matthew 19 and Mark 10 separately. The primary phrase in
question, "except for immorality," is found in Matt. 19:9 and is omitted in Mark. Other
differences between the two passages are secondary and do not demand separate analyses.29
Therefore we have chosen simply to consider the exception clause in its Matthean context.

1. The context of Matthew 19:3-8

When the Pharisees asked Jesus, "Is it lawful fora man to divorce his wife for any
cause?", they were attempting to entrap him .30 In the process, however, they revealed some
assumptions of their own. By beginning with "Is it lawful," they revealed that they viewed
marriage and divorce merely as a matter of legislation. By ending their question, "for any
cause," they betrayed a lax approach to divorce, an approach more in keeping with the school
of Hillel. Josephus, himself a divorce e and a Pharisee, writes:

29 For a discussion of the differences, cf. David Atkinson, To Have and To Hold, pp. 110-111.

30 The question the Pharisees asked was a bit of rabbinic casuistry. If Jesus sided with Hillel, the Pharisees
could charge Jesus with moral laxity. If he sided with Shammai, Jesus could be reproached for his own friendly
treatment of sinners, it could be too strict for many of his followers, and his statement could be given to Herod
who had imprisoned John the Baptist for the same views. If Jesus should reject both and declare himself as
totally against divorce, they could charge him with contradicting the Law of Moses (i.e., Deut. 24).

<a id="ga20-p551"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=553 printed_page=551 -->

"He that desires to be divorced from his wife for any cause whatsoever, (and many
such causes happen among men,) let him in writing give assurance that he never
will use her as his wife any more, for this means she may be at liberty to marry
another husband, although before this bill of deliverance be given she is not to be
permitted to do so ."31 (Bold print, ours.)

These are the same assumptions we find so prevalent in today's world.

Jesus responded by asking incredulously if they had not read Genesis 1:27 and 2:24.
These verses, Jesus said, show that God joined (literally, "yoked together") the two spouses,
that they are now one flesh, and therefore no one should be party to their separation lest he be
found guilty of rebelling against God.

The Pharisees then challenged him: "Why then did Moses command to give her a
certificate and divorce her?" If God's best is "no divorce," why did Moses provide for
divorce? And if Moses provided for divorce, does that not conflict with what Jesus had just
said?

Jesus' reply is of paramount importance as he explains the connection between Moses'
concession following the Fall and God's intention for marriage in Creation. "For the
hardness of your heart moses permitted you to divorce your wives, but from the beginning it
was not so." Two contrasts of view may be discerned in this saying of Jesus.

First, whereas the Pharisees alleged that Moses commanded (eneteilato) divorce, Jesus
said Moses permitted (epetrepsen).32 Permission denotes allowance or sufferance without in
the least implying approval or command. The Pharisees chose to view this divine concession
as divine approval and a legal basis of divorce. It suited their purposes. But Jesus said, "from
the beginning it was not so."

Second, whereas the Pharisees spoke of grounds for divorce, Jesus said the real culprit
was their "hardness of heart" (sklerokardia). This is a term often used of Israel's stubbornness
and rebellion against the will of God (Cf. Dt. 10:16; Jer. 4:40). Whenever Israel failed to
believe and obey God, it was due to their hardness of heart. By implication, according to
Jesus, this too is the cause behind divorce. When people fail to believe and obey what God
has clearly communicated about marriage in Creation, it is their "hardness of heart" that is at
fault.

2. Divorce and remarriage in Matthew 19:9

Jesus concludes by enjoining that whoever divorces his wife for any reason except for
immorality and marries another, commits adultery. Setting aside for the moment the

31 Flavius Josephus, antiquities of the Jews, Book 4, Chapter 8, as published in the works of fla vi us Josephus,
trans. W. Whiston, Philadelphia, p. 141. For a discussion of the Jewish schools of thought as to what constituted
proper grounds to divorce, see David Atkinson, To Have and To Hold, pp. 106-110.

32 For an insightful discussion of the supposed discrepancy between Matthew 19:7-8 and Mark 10:3-4
concerning who used the word "permitted," see John Murray, Divorce, pp. 43 ff.

<a id="ga20-p552"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=554 printed_page=552 -->

exception clause, if we pull together his teaching from Matthew 5:32; Luke 16:18; and Mark
10: 11, we find "all the bases are covered":
Mt. 5:32: a man who divorces his wife makes her to become an adulteress (when
she marries again); a man who marries a woman who has been divorced commits
adultery
Mt. 19:9: a man who divorces his wife and marries another commits adultery;
Mk. 10:11: a man who divorces his wife and marries another commits adultery
against her; and a woman who divorces her husband and marries another commits
adultery;
Lk. 16:18: a man who divorces his wife and marries another commits adultery; a
man who marries a woman divorced from her husband commits adultery.

The point is, if a divorce takes place which has no sanction from God, then any new
union which follows is an adulterous act, being unlawful. Not only is the act of divorce itself
sinful, apart from remarriage, but the act of remarriage after an illegitimate divorce is judged
contrary to the will of God. As we have stated above, the reason an unbiblical divorce can
cause adultery is that God does not honor such a divorce. Following such a divorce,
remarriage constitutes marital unfaithfulness. From God's point of view, they should still be
married to their original partner.

Concerning the adultery involved in remarriage following an unbiblical divorce, we
understand that the consummation of the new union through intercourse is an adulterous act
because it is God's intention that the prior marriage not be broken. This adulterous act, while
breaking the old union, establishes a new relationship which must now stand on its own.

3. The exception clause of Matthew 19:9

"And I say to you, whoever divorces his wife, except for immorality, and marries
another commits adultery."

The presence of the "exception clause" in Matthew 19:9 has caused endless debate
among scholars. The discussion has generally centered around three major questions: the
authenticity of the clause as the words of Jesus; the scope of the exception clause; and the
meaning of the porneia (the Greek term translated "immorality" in the NASV). The first two
questions can be handled quickly for our purposes, whereas the third question needs more
careful consideration.

a. The authenticity of Jesus' words

Many commentators try to argue that the exception clause is not original with Jesus, and
that Matthew or another editor of the Gospel inserted it at a later time. They contend that
Jesus would not have allowed for exceptions and would have branded all divorces as contrary
to the will of God. After all, they argue, look at the absolute form of Jesus' statements in Mk.
10:11-12 and Lk. 16:18.

As a denomination that believes in the inerrancy of Scripture, we take the position that if
the exception clause belongs to the genuine text of Matthew's gospel (and our textual

<a id="ga20-p553"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=555 printed_page=553 -->

apparatus strongly confirms this fact),33 then it is truly the logion of our Lord. Second, its
omission by Mark and Luke is not sufficient ground for rejecting it as an authentic saying of
Jesus. Their silence could be due to their taking the clause for granted. Both pagan and
Jewish culture took adultery as a ground for divorce for granted. It was not in dispute. Third,
we reject the notion that God's Word presents us with conflicting views of what Jesus taught,
which would be the case if Matthew 19 is set over against Mark 10 and Luke 16. Fourth, the
Greek text includes the emphatic "I" (ego), "And I say unto you." What follows would
naturally all be attributed to Jesus. This was indeed Matthew's intention, and Matthew was
there as an eyewitness. For these reasons, the burden of proof rests on those who with critical
presuppositions would take these words from Jesus' lips. The exception clause cannot be
sidestepped in this way as unimportant for one's interpretation.

It is also interesting to recall in this connection Jeremiah 3:8, where Yahweh is said to
divorce Israel for her spiritual adultery (idolatry): "I gave faithless Israel her certificate of
divorce and sent her away because of all her adulteries." If God himself can properly divorce
his bride because of adultery, then, given Christ's unqualified adherence to the authority of the
Old Testament, it seems difficult to conclude that Jesus would not have had similar words on
his own lips.

b. The scope of the exception clause

A major debate has revolved around the scope of the exception clause. Does "except for
immorality" refer only to divorce, or to both divorce and remarriage in this passage? The
Roman Catholic Church, and more recently Heth and Wenham, have held that the phrase
refers only to divorce. According to Heth and Wenham:

"The construction of Matthew 19:9 basically indicates that we are dealing with two
conditional statements, one that is qualified and one that is unqualified or absolute:
1. A man may not put away his wife unless she is guilty of adultery.
2. Whoever marries another after putting away his wife commits adultery. Or, to
paraphrase the idea in another way: 'Putting away for reasons other than
unchastity is forbidden; and remarriage after every divorce is adulterous.'"34

According to John Murray, the sentence cannot be subdivided in that way. There is only
one subject ("whoever"), and one main verb ("commits adultery"), and the ruling thought is of
the husband committing adultery because he both divorces and remarries another woman. So
the unity and coordination of the entire sentence demands that the exception clause relate to
both divorce and remarriage.35

33 John Murray, Divorce, pp. 47-51, deals in deplh wilh the question of textual evidence for the authenticity of
these words of Jesus.

34 Heth and Wenham, Jesus and Divorce, p. 117.

35 John Murray, Divorce, p. 40. Thomas Edgar provides one of the strongest cases against this view of Heth
and Wenham, arguing that their view is both grammatically and logically impossible. Edgar argues his case in
his contribution to Divorce and Remarriage: Four Christian Views, ed. H. Wayne House, "Divorce and
Remarriage for Adultery or Desertion," Downers Grove, 1990, pp. 156-162.

<a id="ga20-p554"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=556 printed_page=554 -->

We agree with John Murray. It is difficult, and indeed strained, to restrict the exceptive
clause to divorce (apoluse) and not extend it also to remarriage (gamese alien). It is
questionable grammatically to interpret Matthew 19:9 as two conditional statements, as
Wenham does. Moreover, the question is logical, not grammatical. Divorce by definition
entailed the right to remarry, as we have noted previously; and Jesus is locating the
committing of adultery not simply in the act of remarriage, but in the fact that someone has
divorced his wife for an inadequate reason and has then remarried.

c. The meaning of pomeia

The heart of the debate centers around the meaning of porneia, often translated
fornication. Our first step must be to survey its uses in both the Old and New Testaments.

Porneia and its cognates serve to translate the Hebrew word zahnah and its cognates.
According to the Arndt and Gingrich Lexicon, porneia may be translated "prostitution,
unchastity, fornication," and may be used "of every kind of unlawful sexual intercourse."
Examples include the harlotry of a married woman (Hos. 2:2), incest (1 Cor. 5:1), or even
homosexuality (Jude 7).36

Of particular importance is the fact that porneia (fornication) is on occasion used
interchangeably with moicheia (adultery; its Hebrew equivalent is nahaph). Examples of this
can be found in the Greek translation of the Old Testament in the parallel clauses of Hosea
2:2, and in Jeremiah 3:1, 2, 6 , 8 where a married adulteress is divorced because of her
fornication. In Ezekiel 23, God tells the story of two women who committed fornication both
before and after marriage; in this extended passage fornication is clearly used to speak both of
sexual sin leading to adultery, and of adultery as its effect. That porneia can refer to adultery
on the part of a married spouse is best see nina quotation from the apocryphal s ira ch
23:22,23: "So it is with a woman who leaves her husband and provides an heir by a stranger
(porneia)."

However, even though these two terms may be used interchangeably, they are not to be
equated. Otherwise, why the two terms, both in Hebrew and Greek? Why would they be
carefully distinguished in verses such as Hebrews 13:4b ("...for fornicators and adulterers God
will judge") and Matthew 15:19 ("For out of the heart come evil thoughts, murders,
adulteries, fornications...)? If the two terms are to be distinguished, how do they differ?

The answer is: whereas adultery refers to the marital unfaithfulness, fornication is
broader and can encompass all sexual sin including adultery. As the logicians and linguists
would say, 'adultery' is not part of the intention of porneia; it is part of its extension.
Porneia is a class, and within the class you may have a number of specific sins which may be
referred to like adultery or homosexuality or prostitution.37

36 William F. Arndt and F. Wilbur Gingrich, A Greek-English lexicon of the new testament and other early
Christian Literature, Grand Rapids, 1957, pp. 699-700.

37 In the words of David C. Jones (Op. Cit., p. 21), "Porneia is the general term for all illicit or immoral sexual
intercourse. The specific form may sometimes be indicated by the context. if payment of wages is involved, it
is prostitution. If it involves close relatives, it is incest. If it involves persons of the same sex, it is

<a id="ga20-p555"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=557 printed_page=555 -->

Some scholars hold that porneia is referring to incest. They argue that this is its
meaning in 1 Corinthians 5:1 and in Acts 15:20.38 First we should note that not that many
commentators agree that Acts 15:20 is referring to incest.39 In the particular case of I Cor.
5:1, it seems quite clear that porneia is used here as a class (sexual immorality) which
includes incest as one of its referents (its extension). Note how the passage reads: "It is
actually reported that there is sexual immorality (porneia) among you, and sexual immorality
of such a kind as does not exist even among the Gentiles, that someone has his father's wife."

The basic significance of porneia in the New Testament may be seen in I Cor 7:2, "But
because of immoralities..." (porneias); the plural points to various immoral acts. The
commands to "flee immorality" (I Cor. 6:18), and "abstain from immorality" (I Thess. 4:3),
naturally refer to sexual sin in general. These are clear examples of its basic use. Thus we
conclude that porneia is a term that refers to sexual immorality in general, and that within this
general classification it may refer to a number of specific sins, depending on its context.
Moreover, we choose to translate porneia, "sexual immorality," since the term fornication in
today's English may refer to sexual sins committed only by the unmarried, and since sexual
immorality communicates better the broad nature of this sin.

d. Is porneia ever used with an even broader meaning?

We must note that porneia has a figurative use as well. In the Old Testament, there are
several prophetic passages which use the analogy of porneia extensively to picture Israel's
marital (or sexual) unfaithfulness to God. These passages picture Israel as Hosea clearly
delineates it as an unfaithful wife wandering away from God her husband (cp. for example
Hosea 1:2). Jeremiah 3 speaks of how treacherous Israel was in going up "on every high hill
and under every green tree, and she played the harlot there" (porneuo). Ezekiel 16 and 23
speak of Israel "multiplying her harlotries" and even "paying her lovers" for fornication.

Because porneia is used to designate Israel's unfaithfulness to God her husband in acts of
idolatry and other sins, therefore by extension other figurative use also designates other acts
of sin and unfaithfulness to God (cf. Numbers 14:33; Isaiah 1:21; and Hebrews 12:16), since
that covenanted relationship is still in view. Furthermore, this figurative use of porneia is
extended even further in the New Testament to describe the rebellion of sinful humanity in
the defilements and abominations represented by the "Great Harlot" (Rev. 17:4; 19:2).

e. What are the current interpretations of porneia?

From our prior discussion, it is clear that porneia has a very common literal meaning
which is "sexual immorality." This is its intensive sense, and its extensive sense can include

homosexuality. if it involves an unmarried couple, it is unchastity. If it involves a married person outside of
marriage, it is adultery."

38 See above, note 5.

39 For an excellent refutation of the view that Acts 15:20 is referring to incest, see Thomas Edgar, "Divorce and
Remarriage for Adultery or Desertion," pp. 177-187.

<a id="ga20-p556"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=558 printed_page=556 -->

such sexual sins as adultery, homosexuality, prostitution, and incest. It is also clear that
porneia is used figuratively in Scripture of spiritual betrayal on the part of God's people.

The issue is, what does porneia mean in Matthew 19:9? We may group current
interpretations under three headings:

View #1: porneia refers to sexual unfaithfulness before marriage

Some scholars hold that porneia refers to a sexual sin separate from marital
unfaithfulness. They prefer to view Jesus as totally against divorce and remarriage.
Therefore, porneia in Matthew 19:9 could not refer to adultery or any kind of sexual sin
within marriage. One such view identifies porneia with premarital unchastity during the
Jewish engagement period. Thus Jesus would be allowing divorce if the bride was found
unfaithful during that period, and they would never have entered into conjugal relations.
Another such view is to identify porneia with incestuous marriages. In this case Jesus would
merely be nullifying a marriage which was unlawful to begin with.

How are we to evaluate this view? A number of compelling reasons stand against our
accepting this view. First, the context of Matthew 19:9 is about marriage and divorce, not
about invalid unions. The Old Testament texts about which Jesus and the Pharisees were
speaking (Genesis 1-2, Deut. 24) refer to marriage, not the engagement period. To suppose
that Christ would have introduced matters having to do with the engagement period, matters
governed by separate legislation and concerning which there was no controversy, when the
issue being discussed was marriage and divorce, seems out of place.

Second, porneia is never specifically used in Scripture of unchastity during the betrothal
period, and is used only once in a context clearly having to do with incest (1 Cor. 5:1).
Although porneia could be referring to both of these sexual sins, it would not be understood
as referring to either one of them unless the context encouraged such an interpretation. No
encouragement is seen in the context by this committee.

Third, there are incidents in Scripture of porneia being used of adultery. To assume that
porneia does not have to do with marital unfaithfulness in a passage discussing marriage and
divorce is to assume too much.

Finally, the whole strength of this interpretation is drawn from the assumption that
divorce with remarriage does not exist in the Bible. This is to beg the argument.

View #2: porneia refers to unfaithfulness in m arriage, not restricted to sexual sin

This second understanding of porneia comes from those who wish to view the term in
both its literal and figurative senses. They argue, since the use of porneia has not been
restricted to sexual sins only, but has also been used in the figurative sense of covenant
breaking, neither should the grounds for divorce be restricted to sexual sins alone. Hence,
porneia may refer to all the ways in which profound unfaithfulness can destroy the covenant
of marriage. They also may view "desertion" in I Cor. 7 as included in their definition of
porneia in Matthew 19. These are sins which undermine the foundations of the marriage
covenant

<a id="ga20-p557"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=559 printed_page=557 -->

How may we evaluate this view? It is undeniably true that porneia occurs in Scripture in
a figurative sense. This view also has the apparent advantage of satisfying the supposed
conflict with I Cor. 7:15 by seeing desertion as a subset of porneia.

In response, we may first observe that in a passage where moicheia (adultery) is used in
a literal sense, it would be expected that its corresponding term porneia (sexual immorality)
would also be used in the same literal way. There would need to be compelling contextual
evidence to take it in its figurative use, particularly in a passage that is talking about the literal
sexual dimension of being one flesh. Moreover, there is no explicit use of porneia in
Scripture for sins within the human marriage relation other than sexual.

Second, in Matthew 19, Jesus is speaking against the backdrop of easy divorce. In doing
so, he was trying to restrict divorce. That he was successful in being restrictive is clear in the
amazement of the disciples to Jesus' words (19:10) and in Jesus' response to them that implies
that they have understood his comments correctly (19:11-12). This context suggests a
narrower use of porneia, that it should not be interpreted in a way that could open it up to all
sorts of grounds for divorce.

Third, if desertion were a subset of porneia, then in 1 Corinthians 7:10-11 Paul would
be denying to the divorced spouse what Jesus would be allowing, namely divorce on the
grounds of porneia.

Fourth, we note that in Scripture Jesus only uses porneia in the literal sexual sense.
This seems to be the most natural sense of the term in Matthew 19:9. The burden of proof
rests clearly with those who would take porneia to include the figurative sense in this
passage.

View #3: porneia refers to sexual unfaithfulness in marriage

The third understanding of porneia is the classical view, that it refers to sexual sins
committed by one within the marriage relationship. Some prefer to interpret porneia as the
equivalent of adultery. Others prefer to view it as encompassing any kind of sexual
immorality while married. It could cover adultery, prostitution, incest, homosexuality,
lesbianism and bestiality, all those vices which would have called for the death penalty in the
Old Testament.

How are we to evaluate this view? One might object, "If Jesus meant adultery, why
didn't he use the specific term for adultery?" But the strengths of this view vastly outweigh
any difficulties that may be raised.

First, the literal sense of porneia seems to fit most naturally into the context (see above,
first observation under View #2). No wonder this has been the classical interpretation for
some 2000 years.

Second, the context of Matthew 19 is the breaking of the marriage covenant, divorce.
Since sexual sins violate the "one flesh" principle of marriage, thereby radically breaking the
unity and exclusivity of marriage, this understanding of porneia as "sexual immorality" fits

<a id="ga20-p558"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=560 printed_page=558 -->

with Jesus granting it as the one exception for breaking the marriage bond and being free to
marry again.

Third, the fact that porneia was chosen, and not moicheia, suggests that it was meant to
cover more than adultery alone in its strictest sense. Sexual sins of a married person such as
having sex with an unmarried person, homosexuality, incest, and prostitution would be
included.

f. Guidelines for applying the meaning of porneia

We agree that porneia refers to "sexual immorality." But sexual immorality could be
understood to include all kinds of sexual sins such as inordinate lust, pornography, or
masturbation. To be sure, these are sins that impinge against the one-flesh relationship, but
they do not necessarily break it.

We ask then, "What does Jesus mean by porneia in this passage as a grounds for
divorce?" We believe Jesus intended porneia to be understood in a more limited way, as
referring to those external sexual actions which would clearly break the one-flesh principle of
marriage. The whole passage centers on a marriage relationship and the exception focuses on
an act that may become the reason for a divorce. Therefore, we must distinguish between
those sexual sins that clearly break the one-flesh union and those that don't. Adultery,
homosexuality, lesbianism, bestiality, and incest are examples of sexual immorality that break
the one-flesh union precisely because they involve sexual union with a being other than one's
marriage partner, i.e., they amount to adultery.

Other acts of sexual immorality do not as clearly serve to break the one-flesh
relationship. The committee would argue that masturbation and the destructive sin of
pornography per se are not grounds for divorce, because they do not unmistakably break the
one-flesh relationship; but if a person becomes so obsessed with them that they become a
substitute for fulfilling the conjugal rights of the spouse, then they could be understood to
break the one-flesh union. Other examples of habitual sexual sin could be cited. But all of
these are unclear cases, and judgment will have to rest with the Session in their application of
biblical principles.

The guiding principle should be whether the sexual sin does indeed break the one-flesh
relationship. Some sexual sins may hurt the marriage union without necessarily breaking it.
but when that sexual sin becomes external i zed in such away that it becomes a substitute for
the one-flesh relation with one's spouse, then the Session may judge it as being the equivalent
of porneia.

E. 1 Corinthians 7:10-15

These verses are referring to two distinct groups of persons. Verses 10-11 presuppose
both partners are believers, and Paul is applying a saying of Jesus which bears directly on that
situation. Verses 12-15 address a mixed marriage situation where one of the spouses has
become a Christian, and Paul speaks to this issue himself.

<a id="ga20-p559"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=561 printed_page=559 -->

1. Instruction to spouses both of whom are believers,
Verses 10-11:

10) "But to the married I give instructions, not I, but the Lord, that the wife should
not leave her husband 11) (but if she does leave, let her remain unmarried, or else
be reconciled to her husband), and that the husband should not send his wife away."

Paul tells the Christian wife not to "leave" (chorizo) her Christian husband, and likewise
tells the husband not to "send away" (aphiemi) his wife. The critical point here is that Paul is
telling them not to "divorce" each other. He uses Greek words which in this context are
referring to divorce, not separation as we know it. According to Gordon Fee in his carefully
documented commentary:

"Much has been made of the use of the verb 'to separate oneself from' [chorizo], in
distinction from the verb used in vv. 12-13, 'to divorce’ [aphiemi]. But that
probably reflects our own urgencies for greater precision. Divorce in Greco-Roman
culture could be 'legalized' by means of documents; but more often it simply
happened. In this culture divorce was divorce, whether established by a document
or not. Either the man sent his wife away (='divorce' in the sense of v.12), or else
either of them 'left' the other (='to separate’)...Ordinarily when the wife 'divorces'
she simply leaves her husband ('is separated 1from him); the same verb is used in v.
15 of a pagan partner of either sex who leaves, and occurs regularly in the papyri
for mutual divorce (agreeing to 'separate from each other’). On the other hand, a
man ordinarily 'divorced' his wife ('sent her away'); nonetheless in v.13 the wife
can do the same."40

We tend to interpret verses 10-11 in terms of modern day separation rather than divorce.
But the Bible does not deal with the idea of separation as a "half-way house" step as we know
it. Perhaps the Biblical writers were so committed to the permanence of marriage that they
did not want to study ways to effect temporary separation. But more likely, it was the fact
that separation in first century society was de facto divorce. That these verses are clearly
referring to divorce is evidenced by the fact that the believing wife is called "unmarried"
(iagamos) in verse 11.

Paul goes on to say that for the two Christian spouses who divorce, there are only two
options. They are to remain unmarried, or better still, be reconciled. (This is consistent with
Jesus' prohibition against remarriage within the church [Mt. 5:31, Lk. 16:18].) The change of
verb tenses emphasizes the direction of Paul's thinking. The wife is to remain unmarried
(present tense, continuous action), or she is to be reconciled (aorist tense, accomplished
action) to her husband. The believer must always remain in a position to be reconciled.
Marriage to another would preclude reconciliation. paul then goes on inverse lib to say
what is true of the wife is also true of the husband.

40 Gordon D. Fee, The First Epistle to the Corinthians, Grand Rapids, 1984, pp. 193-194.

<a id="ga20-p560"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=562 printed_page=560 -->

2. Im portant insights into verses 10-11

Three important points should be noted. First, Paul presents this instruction in the form
of a command (paraggello) and appeals to the authoritative teaching of Jesus. This is one of
the rare instances in Paul's writings where he appeals directly to Jesus. We should not
suppose that Paul lacks authority, but rather that Paul is seeking to add as much force as
possible to his admonition. In other words, this instruction is not just good advice. Married
believers should not divorce.

Second, Paul is acknowledging that improper divorces may in fact occur. This is the
burden of the Greek construction which may be interpreted, "if for any reason this condition
may possibly occur." Paul is not giving a right to divorce. He is recognizing that divorce
may happen, and says that in such cases the wife may not use her present unmarried condition
as an opportunity to many someone else. This is the penalty for a sinful divorce. If she has
the desire to get married, it must be to her former husband. It is striking that Paul didn't say,
"you have to get back together again." Paul clearly recognizes that in certain cases the
marriage will not be restored.

Third, it is remarkable that Paul should focus on the wife seeking a divorce; his remarks
about the husband almost seem like an afterthought. In Jewish culture a woman was
generally not allowed to divorce her husband, although in Greek culture women could do so.
Why would women believers in Paul's day be seeking divorce from believing husbands?
Perhaps it was due to misguided beliefs that ascetic practices or the refusal of sexual relations
in those "last days" was a righteous response (cf. 7:1 ff, 29ff, etc.). We are not sure of the
exact reasons. But whatever the background, the reasons appear to be opposite those given in
our own culture. Today women and men often divorce for the express purpose of marrying
someone else. But Paul does not allow remarriage in this instance, because this would in
effect be adultery, and because the norm of Christians is to be reconciled.

3. instruction to a spouse married to an unbeliever,

Verses 12-15

12) "But to the rest I say, not the Lord, that if any brother has a wife who is an
unbeliever, and she consents to live with him, let him not send her away.
13) And a woman who has an unbelieving husband, and he consents to live with
her, let her not send her husband away.
14) For the unbelieving husband is sanctified through his wife, and the unbelieving
wife is sanctified through her believing husband; for otherwise your children
are unclean, but now they are holy.
15) Yet if the unbelieving one leaves, let him leave; the brother or the sister is not
under bondage in such cases, but God has called us to peace."

These verses presuppose a mixed marriage. Although Paul would not allow an alreadyprofessing Christian to marry an unbeliever (7:39; 2 Cor. 6:14-7:1; cf. Ezra 10:10), in these
verses he forbids a christian to initiate a divorce wi than unbeliever. The present tense
prohibition, me aphieto, seems to suggest that some were in the process of doing so, and he
wanted it stopped. Perhaps believers were using their spouse's unbelief as an excuse for

<a id="ga20-p561"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=563 printed_page=561 -->

getting a divorce, or perhaps believers thought that marriage with an unbeliever somehow
contaminated them. But Paul argues the opposite here. It is not the believer who is defiled,
but the unbeliever who is sanctified, as well as the children of that union. Therefore, if the
unbelieving spouse "is well-pleased to dwell together with" the believing spouse, then the
believer must not resort to divorce.

The church needs to face squarely the implications of this. Paul does not make selffulfillment the law of marriage, and is perfectly willing to require someone to remain in a
marriage that will be painfully difficult. Here is a woman going to heaven, married to a man
going to hell. Here is a woman who prizes above all things the Word and the ways of the
kingdom of God, and here is a man who considers those things to be irrelevant, uninteresting,
and unimportant. He cannot satisfy or encourage her in any of those areas. In the dimensions
of her life which are most precious to her and are most profoundly important to her, her
husband is not only positively no help, but very often is an interference, a frustration. And
yet, Paul says she must stay.

This accent on "no divorce" is consistent with verses 10-11. However, Paul introduces
an exception: "if the unbelieving one leaves." In that case the believer is to "let him leave."
The verb is a third person present imperative, which carries with it a certain ambiguity. Paul
may be viewed here as giving the unbeliever permission to leave, while at the same time
confirming to the believer that that course of action is proper. We should note that Paul
immediately proceeds to say, "the brother or sister is not bound” and "God has called us to
peace." These three ingredients indicate that Paul is allowing, if not ordering, such a
separation.

Again, the verb "leaves" (chorizo) is referring to divorce. Herein lies an interesting
point. Paul is referring to a situation in which the deserted spouse is the passive victim of the
unrighteous termination of a marriage. This suggests that what we have here is not another
ground for divorce, but from the perspective of the offended spouse, a fa it accompli. We are
reminded that there are various views attempting to reconcile the desertion of 1 Corinthians 7
with the porneia (sexual immorality) of Matthew 19. Some hold that desertion is simply an
additional ground for divorce; Jesus was not giving us an exhaustive list. Others hold that
desertion is simply a subset of porneia, porneia being a term which has broader connotations
than illicit sexual sins. But it seems reasonable to argue that Paul views desertion as the
destruction of the marriage which the Christian spouse was unable to prevent. The question
Paul raises is, what should a Christian do if an unbelieving spouse leaves the marriage?

Paul says the believer "is not bound" in such a case. What this means has been disputed.
Some think that Paul simply means that the believer is not bound to maintain the marriage if
the partner opts out.41 Others maintain that all the bonds of marriage have been removed; the
person has been released entirely from every obligation of the former marriage and is free to
marry again.42 Support is found in 7:39: "A wife is bound as long as her husband lives; but if

41 A. Robertson and A. Plummer, a critical and e xe g eli cal commentary on the first epistle of St. Peter to the
Corinthians, Edinburgh, 1911, p. 143. Heth and Wenham, Jesus and Divorce, pp. 94-96,140-144.

42 R. H. Charles, the teaching of the new testament on Divorce, London, 1921, p. 58. H. Ridderbos, Paul: An
outline of his Theology, Transl. J. R. DeWitt, Grand Rapids, 1975, pp. 308-309, n. 139.

<a id="ga20-p562"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=564 printed_page=562 -->

her husband is dead, she is free to be married..." To be bound is to remain married to your
husband. not to be bound is to be free to marry (cf. Romans 7:2f.).

This question is made more difficult by the fact that two different Greek verbs are
translated "bound" in 7:15 and 7:39. In 7:39 (as in Romans 7:2), the verb deo is used. In the
context of marriage, it refers to being bound by law and by duty to one's spouse as long as
they live. In 7:15, douleuo is used in the perfect tense and means "is no longer ina state of
bondage." Some think that since deo is not used in 7:15, Paul is not saying that a believer is
free to remarry.43 others maintain that do ul eu o is a synonym for deo an dis a stronger term,
and therefore Paul is saying that a believer is clearly no longer bound to the unbeliever by law
and is hence free to remarry .44 It seems to us that the burden of proof rests firmly on the
former interpretation. It is not easy to demonstrate that Paul's language in 7:15 means
something less than his language in 7:39.

We conclude that when Paul says, "let him depart, the brother or sister is not bound," the
strong presumption is that he is saying that the believer is not obliged to prevent the divorce
and is also free to remarry. In the circumstances of our culture, Paul would say that the
believer is not obliged to go to court to attempt to stop the divorce, and may in fact undertake
to make de jure what is already de facto by initiating the legal process of divorce.

Finally, Paul states that "God has called you to peace." Does he mean, (1) God has
called you to peace, so you must now be tranquil in the midst of a bad marital situation; or
(2) God has called you to peace, so be at peace as you find yourself free from your former
marital obligations? Coming as it does at the end of verse 15, these words appear to wrap up
the significance of "not being bound." Indeed, peace would be impossible if the unbelieving
spouse were compelled against his will to live with the believer, or if the believer somehow
perpetuated the marriage de jure when it no longer existed de facto.

4. Applying Paul's instruction about desertion today

Are there other forms of "separation" today that may be considered equivalent to this
leaving of the marriage of which Paul speaks? Specifically, what about cases of habitual
physical abuse? Has that person deserted his spouse to the extent we may label it de facto
divorce? We must be careful not to open the floodgate of excuses. On the other hand, we
need to recognize the reality of the "separation". We should allow Sessions the liberty to
discern with much prayer what would be the proper response in a particular circumstance.

Several considerations incline us to agree with those of our authorities who have
maintained that desertion can occur as well by the imposition of intolerable conditions as by
departure itself. We are struck by the fact that, taking Matthew 19 and 1 Corinthians 7
together, it appears that the Lord concedes the necessity of the abolition of marriage in certain
cases precisely so as to protect a blameless spouse from intolerable conditions. Further,
taking into account both the general principles of Biblical ethics and the Scripture's
characteristic manner of ethical instruction, viz. the statement of commandments in a general

43 Helh and Wcnham, Jesus and Divorce, pp. 94-95,141-142.

44 John Murray, Divorce, pp. 74-75. David Atkinson, To Have and To Hold, p. 132, n. 18.

<a id="ga20-p563"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=565 printed_page=563 -->

form to which is added case law sufficient to indicate the manner of application, it seems to
us that those Reformed authorities are correct who have argued that sins which are
tantamount in extremity and consequence to actual desertion should be understood to produce
similar eventualities (cf. Larger Catechism, Q. 99, A. 6).

What is more, a husband’s violence, particularly to the degree that it endangers his wife's
safety, if unremedied, seems to us, by any application of Biblical norms, to be as much a
ruination of the marriage in fact as adultery or actual departure. This is so precisely because
his violence separates them, either by her forced withdrawal from the home or by the
profound cleavage between them which the violence produces, as surely as would his own
departure, and is thus an expression of his unwillingness "to consent" to live with her in
marriage (I Cor. 7:12-13; Eph. 5:28-29). Further, insofar as the "passivity” of the blameless
spouse is an important prerequisite in Paul's permission of the dissolution of marriage on
account of desertion, it seems right to note that in the case of physical abuse, for example, the
blameless spouse is similarly victimized.

Finally, credible alternatives to this point-of-view seem to us to be wholly lacking
Scriptural support. It is all very well to recommend separation as a temporary expedient to
protect a battered wife, but perpetual separation amounts to a Roman Catholic doctrine of the
indissolubility of marriage and could scarcely be justified as a Biblical alternative to divorce.

Indeed, separation of any kind as a means of dealing with marital difficulty and
preventing divorce not only is neither recommended nor mentioned in Scripture, but seems to
be contrary to a fundamental principle of Biblical spirituality, viz. that what ought not to be
done, ought not to be approached.

We are quick to add, however, that the list of sins tantamount to desertion cannot be very
long. To qualify, a sin must have the same extreme effect as someone’s physical
abandonment of his spouse. Both porneia and desertion are objective acts by which a marital
covenant might be broken. The Bible gives no justification for divorce based on merely
inward, emotional, and subjective reasons. Even if we find justification for interpreting
porneia and desertion in a broader sense than some have, they must be broadened only within
the boundaries of serious objective acts of sexual immorality or desertion. They must not be
interpreted in any way that opens the floodgates to divorces based on subjective reasons, such
as "irreconcilable differences," "emotional separation," "loss of affection," or the like. There
is often great pain involved in marriage, and God intends for His people to work through the
pain and learn to love even when we are not loved by the other. Emotional problems in and
of themselves are not Biblical grounds for divorce. And the elders of Christ's Church must
not surrender to worldly pressures and allow that which God does not allow. In this and in
many more ways, the Church's health and integrity depends upon her elders' ability,
willingness and unwavering courage to provide godly, wise, merciful and severe, and
scrupulously Scriptural application of Biblical norms to human situations.

The fact remains that Scripture does not address the circumstance of an abusive husband.
As is the case in any other area of Biblical ethics, one cannot extract from Scripture a
comprehensive statement of all possible applications of a divine law. Rather, it is left to the
church to apply Biblical norms, with the direction provided by the casuistry Scripture does
supply, to the untold number of situations which must be faced. it is important to

<a id="ga20-p564"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=566 printed_page=564 -->

acknowledge that the view that "desertion" in 1 Corinthians 7 cannot be made to refer to
anything but actual departure from house and home and the view we have stated above are
both extrapolations from the Scriptural statements. No one can appeal to a Biblical statement
concerning the duty or the liberty of a battered spouse.

5. Some concluding thoughts about rem arriage,

1 Corinthians 7:39:

"A wife is bound as long as her husband lives; but if her husband is dead, she is free
to be married to whom she wishes, only in the Lord."

This verse reminds us that Scripture provides us with guidelines for remarriage. These
guidelines begin with the principle given in this verse, though they do not stop there. We may
sum up the Scriptural guidelines as follows.

First, Scripture allows for remarriage after the death of one's spouse as seen in this
passage (cf. also Romans 7:3b). Remarriage is commended for widows who have difficulty
restraining their sexual desire as a means of dealing with that need (1 Cor. 7:8, 9). Scripture
even encourages younger widows to remarry due to the temptations and position they could
be in were they not to do so (I Tim. 5:14).

Second, we have observed that a person divorced in accordance with the exception stated
in Matthew 19:9 is free to remarry, because the exception relates to the sentence as a whole
including both the verb "divorces" and also the verb "marries."

Third, we have seen in 1 Corinthians 7:10-11, if two believing spouses divorce, they are
to remain unmarried, or else be reconciled. No remarriage to a third party is envisioned in
this case. However, in a mixed marriage, according to 1 Cor. 7:12-15, the believing spouse is
released ("is not bound") from the marital obligation to the unbelieving spouse when he
divorces the believer and the believer is therefore free to remarry.

"But can those involved in an unbiblical divorce ever remarry? Or can the guilty spouse
in a Biblical divorce remarry? Jesus was quite clear in saying that those who are involved in
a remarriage after an improper divorce commit adultery. By this we understand not that they
are in a continual state of adultery, but that they have committed an adulterous act by which
they have entered into a new marriage relationship. It is a sinful act and should not be
entertained as good or godly. Furthermore, the idea of seeking a divorce with the intention of
remarrying someone else is clearly sinful. However, when one of the spouses in the former
marriage remarries, we may conclude that the other is freed to remarry, because the former
marriage relationship has been permanently broken by that remarriage."

The Church should be careful not to go beyond the Word of God in this matter. Quite
often, persons who have been divorced for unbiblical reasons come to the Church with the
desire to remarry, declaring they are repentant and desirous of living for God. They want
their new union to be sanctified by the Word of God and prayer in a Christian ceremony. The
Church must be careful not to sanction unbiblical remarriages. if a person is truly repentant,
he or she will have a genuine desire to be reconciled with the estranged spouse. There are

<a id="ga20-p565"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=567 printed_page=565 -->

circumstances, however, where that has become impossible, for example where the former
spouse has already remarried, or where the former spouse refuses reconciliation in such a way
that he manifests himself to be an unbeliever. In such cases, remarriage to another person
becomes a possibility.

Moreover, the committee believes that in the providence of God, in due time, such
matters will resolve themselves. In the meantime, those divorced for unbiblical reasons
should find love and counsel in the Church of Jesus Christ. If they are truly repentant, they
should find the same treatment the woman taken in adultery received from Jesus.

But what about those cases where people have been in an unbiblical divorce and have
already remarried? What should be the Church's response to them? The gentle use of
pastoral oversight will ask parties to seek God's gracious forgiveness by repenting of their
past sins in marriage and by rededicating their lives to Christ in the confidence of His
forgiveness and His acceptance of their present marriage. That assumes, of course, genuine
repentance on their part. We must remember that adultery and divorce are not the
unforgivable sin, but that they along with other ungodly sins are covered by the blood of
Christ.

<a id="ga20-p566"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=568 printed_page=566 -->

CHAPTER 3

PASTORAL PERSPECTIVE ON DIVORCE AND REMARRIAGE >

L PREVENTION OF MARITAL PROBLEMS

A. Statement of prevention rationale

The proper nurturing of the couple in the life of the congregation before and during
marriage is a part of supporting biblical faithfulness in marriage. The prevention of
divorce is not only possible, but probable when the problems which lead to divorce are
addressed and resolved in a biblical manner at early stages of development. Since it is
the developed problem that does severe damage to the marriage, prevention of problem
development is essential. Putting out the spark before it becomes a forest fire is both
achievable and wise. Therefore, it is incumbent upon the church to do all it can to
nurture marriages. For this purpose, we are providing the following guidelines and
resources.

B. Guidelines for prevention

This list of guidelines is not exhaustive, but is intended simply to remind us of
ways we can encourage and build up marriages and help prevent divorces from
occurring.

1. Pastors may pursue continuing education in pie-marital and marital
counseling.

2. Pastors and officers should seek assessment and enrichment of their own
marriage and family.

3. Pastors and their wives are encouraged to establish a relationship with
another, preferably older, pastor or elder (and his wife) who has a healthy
marriage and is a man of wisdom.

4. Churches should provide pre-marital counseling for couples whether
previously married or not (minimum of six sessions).

5. Pastors are urged to train other mature couples with strong marriages to do
pre-marital counseling.

l the committee encourages a biblical approach to counseling. The following listing of resources is not
intended to be an endorsement by the PCA. Certain of the resources may have statements of doctrine
which are not in conformity with the Reformed position. These resources are provided, however, as aids
in ministry (i.e., not as doctrinal treatises or positions). The reader should apply Biblical discernment and
evaluation while using them. Also, the Committee affirms that no one person's method of counseling is
being promoted through these guidelines and resources.

<a id="ga20-p567"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=569 printed_page=567 -->

6. Churches should expand their educational programs to include classes for
marriage enhancement and marital preparation.

7. Churches should promote books, conferences and seminars on biblical
marriage and family development for the congregation.

8. Pastors are encouraged to preach sermons on topics which will strengthen
families in the church.

9. The church leadership should train small group leaders in the detecting and
handling of a couple's troubled marriage.

10. Pastors should train Ruling Elders in proper church discipline which seeks to
restore those who have been caught in a sin.

C. Suggested outline for pre-m arital counseling

This outline, provided by an experienced pastoral counselor, will help us reflect on
the depth and breadth of our present efforts at pre-marital counseling. it is not meant to
be definitive.

1. SESSION 1: Gathering general information

a. Determining their spiritual condition
1) If Christian, have each given his testimony
2) If non-Christian, present the gospel
b. Learning their background
1) How they met
2) Their interests and habits
3) Their immediate families
4) Their church experiences and personal beliefs
c. Determining their eligibility for marriage
1) Would they be equally or unequally yoked?
2) Are they presently living together or sexually involved?
3) Are there detrimental health conditions?
4) Inform them if there are reasons you cannot marry them.

NOTE: Much of the data can be gathered in a Data-Intake Form developed
by the pastor ina Pre-Marital Inventory, a copy of which can be found in the
A.P.P.L.E. (Active People Preparing to Love and Encourage) Training
Manual referred to in the Resource section.)

2. SESSION 2: Dealing with finances (could use Larry Burkett tapes)

a. Looking at their financial history
1) Their families' financial attitude; note patterns
2) Whether they are in debt or debt free
3) The dangers of credit card living

<a id="ga20-p568"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=570 printed_page=568 -->

b. Helping them draw up a budget for common household expenses
1) Include house, insurance (life and health), automobile, food,
savings, medical needs, etc.
2) Include tithes and other contributions
3) Consider where the money will be coming from, and how it is
shared
c. Discussing a new will

3. SESSION 3: Discussing the family

a. Reviewing their family histories
1) Whether traditional or single parent households have affected
family beliefs
2) Whether major unresolved family problems or estranged
relationships exist
3) Whether attitudes toward prospective in-laws are detrimental
4) Whether there was a history of family violence or child abuse
(emotional, physical, sexual) and how these issues were resolved.
b. Discussing Biblical concepts of the family
1) The Biblical foundation of marriage
2) Sexual intimacy
3) The role of the husband as the head of the marriage
4) The role of the wife as his helper
5) The role of parenting children
c. Considering their future family
1) Discussing their ideas of family size
2) Discussing their ideas of contraceptives; discussion of various
means, and referring to a physician if appropriate
3) Discussing generally any sexual inhibitions or misconceptions
d. Exploring past sexual activity, if any
1) Whether immorality needs to be confessed
2) Whether repentance needs to be demonstrated
3) Whether forgiveness needs to be extended
4) Whether there was any previous victimization of sexual abuse
towards them in the past and how this issue was resolved
(professional counseling, etc.)

4. SESSION 4: Dealing with sexual intimacy (could use Ed Wheat tapes)

a. What were their parental husband/wife models?
1) Were there warm or cold relationships?
2) Were they dominating or subjugating?
b. What is the Biblical model?
1) The husband: loving leader, protector, provider
2) The wife: loving helpmate, companion, under his leadership
c. Are there any sexual fears?
1) Possibly having physical pain
2) Physically satisfying eich other

<a id="ga20-p569"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=571 printed_page=569 -->

3) Communicating likes and dislikes
4) Holding strictly to fidelity
5) Issues surrounding previous victimization that should be dealt with
professionally

5. SESSION 5: Looking at common interests

- **a.** Their friends
- **b.** Their hobbies and recreation
- **c.** Their educational backgrounds
- **d.** And how disinterests may affect their relationships

NOTE: The pastor or counselor may want to give personality and
temperament tests to the couple in order to help them understand each other
and better minister to each other as future husband and wife.

6. SESSION 6 : Wrapping up the sessions

- **a.** Discussing perspectives that have been discovered
- **b.** Discussing behavior they have discovered about themselves and each other during the course of the counseling
- **c.** Discussing implementation of necessary changes in perspectives and behavior discovered during the course of the counseling
- **d.** Discussing wedding arrangements; it would probably be helpful to set aside a separate time to go through the entire wedding service
- **e.** Setting up a future session three to six months after the wedding to deal with challenges faced by the couple and specifically with communication and conflict resolution.

7. POST-WEDDING SESSIONS

- **a.** Having check-ups at three months, six months, and a year
- **b.** Asking whether any issues have arisen
- **c.** Discussing progress on necessary changes which were identified in pre marital counseling sessions
- **d.** Dealing specifically with conflict resolution and communication techniques; blending family backgrounds and roles over lifetime.
- **e.** Encouraging them to make themselves available to marriage and family seminars

D. Resources

1. Personnel

For the personal growth and assessment of pastors and Christian leaders

- **a.** Other pastors or local counselors
- **b.** PCA conferences

<a id="ga20-p570"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=572 printed_page=570 -->

- **c.** World Harvest Mission, PO Box 2175, Jenkintown, PA., 19046.
- **d.** (CCEF) Christian Counseling and Educational Foundation, 1790 East

Willow Grove Ave., Laverock, PA., 19118
e. Wes Roberts, Life Enrichment for Christian Leaders, Christian Marriage
Enrichment, 8000 East Girard, Suite 601, Denver, CO., 80231.

- **f.** Diane Langberg, Ph. D., Psychologist and counselor for pastors and wives, 8206 High School Road, Elkins Park, PA., 19117.
- **g.** Louis McBumey, M.D., Marble Retreat, 139 Bannock Bum, Marble, CO., 81623, 303-963-2499.
- **h.** Joseph Wolstencroft, Ph.D., Counselor for pastors, pastor's wives, and

Christian workers; Christian inpatient adult program; OASIS Christian
Treatment Programs, Suite 201,964 Georgia Avenue, Macon, Georgia,
31201 (800-926-2747).

2. Seminars, Videos

For aid in marital counseling

a. Larry Crabb, Dan Allender, and Tom Varney IBC (Institute of Biblical
Counseling), 16075 W. Belleview Avenue, Morrison, CO., 80465
Includes seminars such as Basic Counseling, Sexual Abuse, Parenting
Adolescents, Next Step Seminars. Also includes videos on counseling.
b. Wayne Mack (CCEF), a correspondence course entitled Marriage and
Family Counseling, 1790 East Willow Grove Ave., Laverock, PA.,
19118.
c. Wes Roberts, of Life Enrichment (ministry to hurting pastors), 14581 E.
Tufts Ave., Denver, CO., 80015.

For marriage enhancement

- **a.** Ed Wheat, Scriptural Counsel Inc., 130 North Spring St., Springdale, AR., 72764 Love Life Seminar.
- **b.** James Dobson, Focus on the Family, 4800 West Waco Drive, Waco, TX., 76796 Various series including Turn Your Heart Toward Home, Communication in the Home, to spark or not to Spark, As For Me and

My House, Busy Husbands, Lonely Wives, The Intimate Marriage, The
Wife's and Husband's view of Submission.
c. Gary Smalley, Relationship Today Inc., Paoli Corporate Center, 16
Industrial Blvd., Paoli, PA., 19301, 800-232-3232. Hidden Keys to
Loving Relationships (video with guide book), and Love Is A Decision.
d. Howard Eyrich, 21203 Saddlemaker Dr., St. Charles, MO., 63303, 314-
441-8821. Family Life Seminar: Destroyers and Builders.
e. Bob and Rosemary Barnes, Sheridan House, Word Inc. - Videos.
Marriage: Making The Spark A Flame (4 video series)
f. Howard Hendricks, Dallas Theological Seminary, Attn. Distribution
Center, 3909 Swiss Ave., Dallas, TX., 75204. The Role and
responsibility of the Husband, the role and responsibility of the Wife.

<a id="ga20-p571"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=573 printed_page=571 -->

g. Joseph Wolstencroft, The Institute for Family Strength (IFS), 682
Mulberry Street, Macon, GA 31201,912-742-6940. The Building Blocks
of family strength Seminar.

For help in pre-marital counseling

- **a.** Some of the video series above.
- **b.** Ed Wheat and Gloria Oaks Perkins, (address above) Before the Wedding

Night.

- **c.** Larry Burkett, Evangelical Films Inc., 1750 NW Hwy., Suite 250, Garland, TX., 75041, 800-527-4014. How To Manage Your Money (3 videos)
- **d.** Howard Hendricks, (address above), Preparing Young People for

Marriage.

3. Books

For the personal growth and assessment of pastors

Hybels, Bill, Honest To God, Zondervan.
Morley, Patrick, Man in the Mirror, Wolgemuath and Hyatt.

For aid in marital counseling

Rekers, George, Counseling Families: Resources for Christian Counseling,
Word Books.
Stuart, Robert, A.P.P.L.E. Training (Active People Preparing to Love and
Encourage), available by writing to Dr. Stuart, 7433 NW 4th St., Plantation,
FL„ 33317-2204.
Wheat, Ed, Love Life for Every Marriage Couple, Zondervan.
Worthington, Everett, Marriage Counseling, Intervarsity Press.

For marriage enhancement

Barnes, Robert and Rosemary, Marriage: Keeping the Spark a Flame,
Banner.
Blitchington, W. Peter, Sex Roles and the Christian Family, Tyndale House.
Crabb, Larry, The Marriage Builder, and Men and Women: Enjoying the
Difference, Zondervan.
Dad's Only, a magazine with creative ideas for dads, 15110 Ave. of Science,
San Diego, CA., 92128, 619-487-7099.
Deal, William, God's Answer for the Unequally Yoked, Good News
Publishers.
Harley, Willard, His Needs / Her Needs, Fleming H. Revell Co.
Mack, Wayne, Strengthening Your Marriage, Presbyterian and Reformed
Publishing Co.
Mason, Mike, mystery of Marriage, Multnomah.
Palmer, B. M., and J. W. Alexander, The Family, Sprinkle.

<a id="ga20-p572"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=574 printed_page=572 -->

Piper, John, and Wayne Grudem, eds., *Recovering Biblical Manhood &amp; Womanhood*, Crossway.

Sproul, R. C., *Discovering the Intimate Marriage*, Bethany House.

Wheat, Ed, *Love Life for Every Marriage Couple*, Zondervan.

Wright, H. Norman, *Understanding the Man in Your Life*, Word Incorporated.

## For pre-marital counseling

Barnes, Bob and Rosemary, *Positive Parenting*, Banner.

Elliot, Elisabeth, *The Mark of a Man*, Fleming H. Revell Co.

Eyrich, Howard, *Three To Get Ready*, Baker.

Lewis, Kay Oliver, *The Christian Wedding Handbook*, Fleming H. Revell Co.

Mack, Wayne, *Preparing for Marriage God's Way*, Virgel W. Hensley, Inc. (6116 E. 32nd St., Tulsa, OK., 74315).

McDowell, Josh and Lewis, Paul, *Givers, Takers, and Other Kinds of Lovers*, Tyndale Publishers.

Wheat, Ed, *Intended for Pleasure*, and *Love Life for Every Married Couple*, Zondervan.

Smalley, Gary, *For Better, For Best* (for women), *If Only He Knew* (for men), *How To Become Your Husband's Best Friend*, Zondervan.

Sproul, R. C., *Discovering the Intimate Marriage*, Bethany House.

Wright, Norman, *Premarital Counseling*, Moody Press.

## For an overview of marriage, divorce, and remarriage

Adams, Jay, *Marriage, Divorce, and Remarriage in the Bible*, Baker.

Atkinson, David, *To Have and To Hold*, Eerdmans.

House, Wayne, ed., *Divorce and Remarriage: Four Christian Views*, Intervarsity Press.

Hurley, James B., *Man and Woman in Biblical Perspective*, Zondervan.

Murray, John, *Divorce*, Presbyterian and Reformed Publishing Co.

## II. PASTORAL CARE AND COUNSEL OF COUPLES WITH MARITAL DIFFICULTIES

### A. Understanding the couple

#### 1. Know the times

Marriage difficulties are a given. There is no way to escape them. Whenever two people (both having fallen natures) co-habit for any length of time, the negatives in each other's character will rise to the surface and cause conflict in the relationship. In fact, a primary factor in the decay of major civilizations has been the deterioration of the family unit. That deterioration starts with the couple. If left unchecked, divorce will occur at the rate of 50% in all marriages contracted in the United States.

<a id="ga20-p573"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=575 printed_page=573 -->

2. Know the people

Most people many for wrong reasons. They may think it to be God's will, but
when the reasons arc analyzed and compared with the biblical reasons for marriage,
selfishness normally surfaces. Most people marry not to glorify God or emulate the
marriage of Christ to His Church, but to have their own needs met. A bride or groom
do not normally look at marriage as a ministry to which they have been called by God.
As a result, within two years of saying "I do", when the emotional and sexual part of
love has waned, conflicts surface and character flaws are clearly seen.

If the conflicts are not recognized, confronted, and resolved, divorce becomes
immanent. According to the American Academy of Matrimonial Lawyers, the
following are the major causes of divorce:

a. Lack of communication
b. Divergent personal growth patterns (i.e. selfishness)
c. Sex, adultery, or lack of affection (i.e. sexual sin or failure to understand each
other's sexuality)
d. Money
e. Lack of understanding

These and other issues must be addressed during marital counseling.

Complaints by husbands and wives against the other are universal. It doesn’t
matter whether the couples are from the north or the south, the east or the west. The
complaints are common. When each sex is asked what grates them most about the
opposite sex, the following complaints surface over and over again.

a. Women's gripes against men
(1) Lack of leadership
(2) No sensitivity
(3) No understanding of who we are
(4) Doesn't listen
(5) Takes me for granted
(6) Thinks he knows it all
(7) Not affectionate (only wants sex)

b. Men’s gripes against women
(1) Seeks to control relationship (manipulation)
(2) Nags
(3) No understanding of who we are
(4) Lack of respect
(5) Demands too much
(6) Doesn't like sex

If these concerns are left unresolved, they fester into greater conflicts resulting in a
deeply strained relationship which in most cases leads to divorce. In comparing the
gripes with the causes of divorce, one can easily see the similarities.

<a id="ga20-p574"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=576 printed_page=574 -->

3. Know the ministry

In over 50% of the marriages which are experiencing marital problems, one or
more of the spouses will approach his or her local clergyman. The pastor, therefore, has
to be willing and able to help his congregants work through the issues or conflicts in the
marriage. Since most couples seek help at a crisis point, it will be rare that the marriage
problems can be resolved in three or four sessions. The pastor must be prepared for
three or four months of weekly counseling if both parties are sincerely trying to work
through the difficulties. If one spouse is not genuinely concerned about resolving the
problems, the time frame will be much longer.

The pastor will have to decide whether he can continue to counsel after four
sessions, bring in a lay person to help, or refer to another counselor. Pastors do need to
recognize their limitations so that counseling doesn't overwhelm their other pastoral
responsibilities.

B. Guidelines for marital counseling.

1. Recognize the danger zones

most pastors who fall into sexual sin become involved as a result of counseling a
female member of the church. Take the following precautions:

a. Never counsel a female alone.
Have someone nearby, in the outer office, or preferably in the session
with you. If possible, have another female who will disciple, encourage,
and hold the female counselee accountable during the week. Never
counsel after hours or on weekends without your wife being present with
you.

b. do not ride alone ore a tina restaurant with another female who is not a
member of your family.
Gossip spreads rapidly and your reputation can be quickly ruined.

c. In counseling with a female under proper circumstances beware of the
emotional pull involved.
You may find yourself becoming emotionally attracted to the counselee.
Or you may discover she is becoming emotionally attracted to you. This
is a sign to break off counseling and refer her (or the couple) to another
for continued counseling.

d. Understand your own hurts
If you are struggling with emotional hurts or relational difficulties
yourself, you are vulnerable to an emotional attachment which can lead
to sinful activity.

<a id="ga20-p575"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=577 printed_page=575 -->

2. Know when to refer

a. Pastors have a primary responsibility to care for and counsel those whom
the Lord has put under their charge.
b. If both parties are cooperating, it still will take three or four months of
intensive counseling to work through the issues.
c. Decide after four sessions whether you will continue to counsel with the
couple or whether to refer.
d. Refer:
(1) If issues are beyond your capabilities, or
(2) If you are not able to do lengthy counseling with the couple.

3. Develop a referral list

- **a.** Meet with counselors in your community and determine if they are competent, biblical, and available for referrals.
- **b.** Determine the specialties or areas of interest of the counselors.
- **c.** Gather information from other pastors regarding counselors in your area.
- **d.** Train lay people to help counsel those struggling in marriages.

4. Have readily available a list of hotlines and crisis intervention centers.

- **a.** Know the procedures for involving the social service or abuse prevention people in your area.
- **b.** Understand the state law for reporting domestic or child abuse cases.

5. In a crisis situation, if possible, bring another person with you when you
attempt to minister.

6. Establish rules of the office

- **a.** Have regular times for counseling each week.
- **b.** if counseling at night or on a weekend, have your wife with you.
- **c.** Never counsel a female alone.
- **d.** Develop data in-take forms.

(1) Have couples fill out this inventory
(2) Make it extensive enough to gather good information and to weed
out people who are not really interested in counseling.
e. Supervise your lay counselors.

7. Involve your counselees in the church activities, especially a small group
Bible study.

C. Practical considerations

1. Monitor your own marriage

- **a.** Continue dating your wife.
- **b.** Spend time in meaningful communication.
- **c.** Take overnight trips together.
- **d.** Receive criticism and change your negative habits.
- **e.** Seek counseling if wife says it is needed.

<a id="ga20-p576"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=578 printed_page=576 -->

2. Develop a lay counseling program.

- **a.** Have interested people watch and discuss videos, i.e., on encouragement, sharing, etc.
- **b.** Offer a counseling class each year.
- **c.** Occasionally offer seminars that deal with helping those hurting in marriage.
- **d.** Have men disciple men and women disciple women.

3. Follow up those you have counseled or referred with cards, phone calls, visits,
or consultations.

- **a.** Once a church member has been referred, the church's ministry to that person does not cease.
- **b.** There needs to be continuing contact by the pastor, one or two elders, and some supportive lay people.

4. Start formal discipline when appropriate

- **a.** First write to the uncooperative spouse and express disappointment for not counseling and request him or her to become involved in the counseling process.
- **b.** If one spouse remains uncooperative or refuses to counsel, have the cooperating spouse in writing request Session intervention.
- **c.** have the Session appoint a commissionof two or three eldersto meet with the parties, to strongly recommendcounseling, and to order counseling if the parties are members of the church. If a spouse refuses and continues with contumacious and unrepentant behavior, then the commission is to commence with formal discipline according to the

Book of Church Order.

5. Institute family ministries.

- **a.** Have yearly couples' retreats.
- **b.** Have family retreats and campouts.
- **c.** Sponsor family seminars and marriage workshops.
- **d.** Have Sunday school class on marriage and the roles of husband and wife.
- **e.** Develop a pre-marital counseling program.

D. Resources

1. Personnel

- **a.** Local counselors
- **b.** Experts to help train the pastor and lay people to do counseling
- **c.** Wes Roberts of Life Enrichment (ministry to hurting pastors), 14581

East Tufts Avenue, Denver, CO 80015.

<a id="ga20-p577"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=579 printed_page=577 -->

2. Seminars

a. IBC (Institute of Biblical Counseling)
Dr. Larry Crabb and Dr. Dan Allender
16075 W. Belleview Avenue
Morrison, CO 80465
(303) 697-5425

b. A.P.P.L.E. (Active People Preparing to Love and Encourage)
Dr. Robert D. Stuart
7433 NW Fourth Street
Plantation, FL 33317-2204
(305) 581-5910

c. Love is a Decision
Gary Smalley and Dr. John Trent
Today's Family
Box 22111
Phoenix, AZ 85028

d. Family Life Conference, A Weekend to Remember
A Ministry of Campus Crusade for Christ International
Family Ministry
P.O. Box 23840
Little Rock, AR 72221-3840
(501) 223-8663

e. IFS (Institute for Family Strength)
Building Blocks of Family Strength Conference
Breaking Free: Principles of Life Management
Dr. Joseph Wolstencroft
682 Mulberry Street, Macon, Georgia, 31201
(912) 742-6940

f. DVP Learning Center, Inc.
P.O. Box 31227
Aurora, CO 80041-1227

3. Books

To have a better understanding of biblical anthropology.

Adams, Jay, theology of Counseling, Zondervan.
C rabb, Lawrence, Understanding People, Ministry Resource Library, a
division of Zondervan Publishing House.
C rabb, Lawrence, Inside Out, Nav Press.
McGee, Robert H., The Search for Significance, Rapha.

<a id="ga20-p578"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=580 printed_page=578 -->

Piper, John, and Grudem, Wayne, Recovering Biblical Manhood &
Womanhood, Crossway.
Seamands, David, Healing for Damaged Emotions, Victor Books.

To build a biblical marriage.

Crabb, Lawrence, The Marriage Builder, Zondervan.
Dobson, James C, Straight Talk to Men and Their Wives, Word Books.
Groom, Nancy, Married Without Masks, Nav Press.
Smalley, Gary, if only he Knew, Zondervan.
Wilson, P. B., Liberated Through Submission: The Ultimate Paradox,
Harvest House.
Wheat, Ed, Love Life for Every Married Couple, Zondervan.
Wright, H. Norman, Communication: Keys to Your Marriage, Regal
Books.
Mayhall, Jack and Carole, Opposites Attack, Nav Press.

To understand one's sexuality.

Dillow, Joseph C., Solomon on Sex, Thomas Nelson Publishers. 1977.
Dobson, James, What Wives Wish Their Husbands Knew About Women,
Tyndale House Publishers.
Hocking, David and Carole, Romantic Lovers: The Intimate Marriage,
Harvest House Publishers.
Wheat, Ed, Intended for Pleasure, Fleming H. Revell Co.
Wheat, Ed, Love Live for Every Married Couple, Zondervan.
Unger, Ken, True Sexuality, Tyndale House Publisher.

HI. DISCIPLINE AS IT PERTAINS TO COUPLES CONSIDERING DIVORCE

A. Guidelines for discipline issues

1. The local church's responsibility to become involved.

Maintaining the life-directing truth of Scripture is the church's responsibility to her
members. In dealing with couples considering divorce or involved in the divorce
process, the church must compassionately maintain the Bible's lifestyle standards. But
elders must be careful not to regard discipline and compassion as competing truths of
Scripture; they cannot exercise Biblical discipline apart from Biblical compassion.

The Westminster Confession states that the church must not leave persons
considering divorce "to their own wills, and discretion, in their own case". Such a
charge is startling to many in our society. "Mind your own business" is often the
response to elders approaching a couple in trouble. Couples may call upon the church
to marry them and baptize their children. But problems between a husband and wife are
often viewed as a private matter and not the elders' concern.

<a id="ga20-p579"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=581 printed_page=579 -->

Such a charge will less likely be laid at the feet of properly trained elders who have
been shepherds to their flock. This should begin with education in new members
classes. Teach prospective members that their vow to "submit.. .to the government and
discipline of the church" means that the elders will be active shepherds, caring for them,
even to the point of embracing the fearful responsibility of stepping into problems
between husband and wife. Often elders do not want to raise such issues in a new
members class for fear of turning inquirers away, or giving them too much "hard
doctrine". On the contrary, inquirers should know that they are considering
membership in a church where the elders will love them enough to shepherd them in
crisis. It is recommended that each church prepare a written membership covenant for
new members describing, among other things, Biblical discipline as reflected in the
Book of Church Order.

Biblical discipline, especially in matters of family strife, must be preceded by time
spent with the family in "good" times, praying for them in their homes and sharing time
and meals with them. An elder whose first visit to the family's home is to discuss
marital strife will be severely hamstrung, if he is allowed to enter the home at all.

Active elder involvement with a family will also increase the likelihood of early
elder involvement with problems. Too often the church faces a fa it accompli by
members who have made the decision to dissolve the marriage. Arriving late, the elder
must try to get the member to reconsider his or her decision, rather than discussing the
problems of the marriage.

Understanding that discipline in the narrow sense of seeking restoration of the
marriage must be based upon discipline in the broad sense of compassionate
involvement with members' lives, we are now prepared to consider what the church can
do when a couple has such marital strife.

2. How does the local church become involved?

How does the couple, or one of them, come to the Session with their marriage
problem? Perhaps both spouses will come to an elder and ask for help. If only one
spouse comes to the church for help, ask the one seeking help to encourage their spouse
to come for help also. But often only one spouse is willing to come to an elder. In such
a case, the elder should ask the one seeking help to write a letter to the Session to
request pastoral care and that the elders become involved in the attempts at
reconciliation. The Session may then meet with the spouse or spouses willing to meet.
Or, the session may choose to appoint a commission of a teaching elder an done or two
ruling elders to work with the family and report to the Session, rather than leaving the
shepherding to one elder. But, the spouses should not be left to their own wills. If an
elder becomes aware that a couple is having marital problems, it is that elder's
responsibility to use appropriate, loving means to help the couple.

<a id="ga20-p580"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=582 printed_page=580 -->

3. What if both spouses will talk with an elder?

This is, of course, the best case scenario. If both members are willing to discuss
their problems with a teaching or ruling elder, the church can appeal to each with the
Word of God. It is not likely, however, that a few meetings with an elder will
effectively deal with problems in the relationship. If Elders should refer people to
another counselor, they are obliged to insure that a Biblical faith is inextricably woven
into his or her counseling practices. Elders, especially teaching elders, should become
familiar with local counselors and spend time with them to understand their approach to
dealing with marital problems.

The elder should instruct the couple that, excepting sexual immorality, divorce is
not an option for two people professing Christ. While Scripture allows divorce for
sexual immorality, it does not command it, nor encourage it. The first priority is to seek
forgiveness and reconciliation. Jesus is in the "business" of reconciling people and the
church should be about her Savior's business. Husband and wife have the same Lord
and have received forgiveness from Christ. How then can one deny the other
forgiveness when it is sincerely sought?

The church must proclaim Christ and counsel each spouse regarding his or her sin
against God. Forgiveness should start with repentance of the sin precipitating the crisis.
Too often the church is willing to deal with the immediate sin (e.g. adultery, wifebeating) without asking God to expose other sins in the relationship. Such matters are
hard to consider and require time and prayer by elders and counselors. But unless the
couple recognizes and repents of sin in the relationship, the problems will reoccur.

The church should stand ready to assist the couple in other ways. The elders
should guard against the couple withdrawing from fellowship in the church. Their
friends may need to encourage them and make special efforts to include the couple in
fellowship. If the church refers to another counselor, but money is scarce, the referring
church should consider helping the couple to pay. If the problem is physical abuse, a
temporary home may be needed for one of the spouses.

4. What if one spouse refuses to talk with an elder?

This is a common situation. One spouse makes his decision apart from, or in spite
of, elder involvement and separates and files for divorce. There are concurrent steps the
church should take with each spouse.

a. For the spouse who will talk with an elder

First, the elders must counsel patience. Too often a spouse is willing to initiate
legal process when one can and should wait.

Second, the elders must carefully approach the question of delving beneath the
precipitating cause of the divorce to the underlying issues. The elders cannot allow
themselves to be used by one spouse seeking the condemnation of the other's sin, while
refusing to acknowledge, in most cases, some responsibility for the crisis. The elders

<a id="ga20-p581"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=583 printed_page=581 -->

may face a member whose conduct evidences relief that the other spouse has committed
a sin that allows the member to initiate divorce proceedings without guilt. The elders
must exercise discretion and not allow themselves to be manipulated.

If the wife is the spouse willing to meet with the elders, she may feel intimidated
as the only woman in the meeting. A godly woman friend or, if applicable, her
counselor could be encouraged to attend the meeting with the wife, or the elders can
encourage her to bring her counselor to the meetings for support and assistance.

Third, the Session must make a judgment as to each spouse's willingness to seek
reconciliation and which spouse, if any, has Biblical grounds to initiate dissolution of
the marriage. If the Session determines that formal discipline is mandated, the Book of Church Order must be followed closely. Also, the church must make clear to the
offended spouse and to the rest of the church that that spouse is a member in good
standing and should be supported by the church.

Fourth, the church should be ready to recommend legal counsel to the spouse.
When one spouse leaves, the other one should be able to talk to a lawyer to be sure the
demands and limits of divorce laws are understood. Godly legal counsel can help avoid
steps that make reconciliation more difficult. But the elders should understand that the
courts will grant a spouse's request to dissolve the marriage; present law in the various
states requires scant, if any, ground for divorce. "Contesting a divorce" actually means
contesting the arrangements regarding the children or finances, not whether the court
will grant a divorce.

Fifth, diaconal ministry may be needed. Often a wife begins legal process for the
very practical reason that her husband refuses financial support while they are living
apart. Family members should be encouraged to help. If family assistance is
insufficient, the church should consider whether financial assistance for living expenses
can be provided to allow the wife to avoid initiating legal process during the period
when attempts are being made by the church to reclaim her husband. Other appropriate
assistance may include finding a home fora battered wife, assisting with child care and
finding employment. Above all, elders should encourage church members to reach out
to, not withdraw from, those facing divorce.

b. For the spouse who will not talk with an elder.

First, every effort must be made to reclaim the offending spouse.. The elders must
try to get the member to talk with them following Jesus' guidance of Matthew 18 in
resolving disputes within the church if the member is contumacious. The same
approach can be made with a non-member. The Session may want to appoint a
commission to attempt to talk with the member and report to the Session and to institute
formal disciplinary procedures as necessary.

There may be other church members whose aid can be enlisted by the elders. Let
the member know that the elders want to hear both sides of the problem and that
underlying issues will be explored. This can be done without excusing sin. If the elders
are perceived by the member to have "taken sides” with the other spouse,

<a id="ga20-p582"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=584 printed_page=582 -->

communication will be impossible. The member may refuse the first attempt to talk,
but the elders must not be satisfied with an "obligatory" attempt. Be persistent.

If the spouse refuses any communication with the elders, then the church should
write to the unwilling spouse of their concerns. Tell the spouse that the elders want to
help the couple explore the problems of the marriage and recommend a counselor, if
needed. Offer, if appropriate and the church is capable, to pay for counseling.
Admonish the spouse that divorce will lead to grievous consequences for the couple,
their children and even their children' children. Straight talk about sin and the reality of
divorce is called for. Explain the financial hardship of running two homes on an
income probably stretched to run one, the effects on the children and parents of
weekend visitation, and the loneliness of holidays without the children. Advise the
unwilling member of possible formal disciplinary actions if the healing of the marital
difficulties is not sought.

5. What if the elders pursue formal discipline?

elders should be familiar with the provisions in the Book of Church Order
regarding discipline and they should be aware of actions which could invite a lawsuit.
If the Session determines that formal discipline is required, the Book of Church Order
must be followed closely. This committee commends to each Session for careful
consideration the following advice given by James E. Ostenson:

"1. Of the numerous lawsuits that have been filed by disciplined church members
and church staff, there have been four primary causes:

- **a.** Inconsistency by a church in exercising discipline — disciplining some, while ignoring the discipline of others.
- **b.** Abuses by churches of the discipline process —spreading gossip, failing to follow established procedures, etc.
- **c.** Failure by churches to communicate with members about the role of discipline in the life of the church, so that members do not know in advance that they may be subject to discipline.
- **d.** Society's emphasis on the rights of the individual.

2. There is no guaranteed method of avoiding a lawsuit, but the following are
recommendations for churches in practicing church discipline:

a. Give notice that the church practices discipline
(1) In church bylaws
(2) In formal written membership covenants
(3) As part of church membership training - provide a written Biblical
statement as part of membership materials
(4) As a subject of preaching and teaching

b. Make sure the church is consistent in its practice of discipline, even
when a potential case is particularly awkward.

<a id="ga20-p583"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=585 printed_page=583 -->

c. Determine the church's disciplinary procedures in advance of needing to
use them. In the Presbyterian Church in America, the Book of Church Order covers all essential procedures. Be sure officers are familiar with
the steps outlined there, and that they study them thoroughly before
beginning a disciplinary matter.

d. In handling a disciplinary case, stress accuracy. Basing actions on
assumptions and impressions will lead to trouble.

e. If legal action is threatened by the member charged consult a Christian
attorney to review the procedures the church is following before
proceeding.

f. Limit the "audience" to the "community of interest". Unnecessary
publication of the disciplinary matter is unethical and can lead to
lawsuits. the Book of Church Order gives church courts discretion as to
public announcements of church discipline. If the court decides to
announce the discipline to the membership, the following are
recommended guidelines:
(1) Hold a closed congregational meeting. Ask all visitors to leave.
(2) Read a brief statement from the Session which has been written
ahead of time and deals with the case only generally, not in specific
detail. Do not mention other individuals, who, while perhaps
involved in the matter, were not members of the church subject to
discipline.
(3) Discreetly tape record the meeting so there is a record of what was
said. Also keep a copy of the written statement that was read.
(4) After reading a brief statement which focuses on Biblical reasons
for the discipline, lead the congregation in prayer for the
individual(s) involved and the church as a whole. Be sure that the
scope of information disclosed is limited. it is not necessary to
identify the specific sin involved -- a reference to "unrepentant sin"
might suffice.

g. Any written announcements made should usually be sent only to the
congregational membership, and no more should be said than is
necessary to inform the congregation of the Session's compliance with
biblical teaching in dealing with the problem, and to inform the members
of the repentance expected of them by the Scriptures (cf., Paul;'s
correspondence abut discipline, 1 Cor. 5:1-13; 2 Cor. 2:1-11; 7:8-13).

h. Maintain an attitude of planning your procedures in advance rather than
just reacting to problems that develop. In the care of Christ's Church,
there will inevitably be difficulties, but He will honor efforts to maintain
the purity of His Bride.

i. More than anything else, do church discipline "by the Book". Follow
scripture and the Book of Church Order meticulously. Many problems

<a id="ga20-p584"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=586 printed_page=584 -->

in discipline cases can be traced to church officers getting creative and
ignoring established procedures."

Proceed slowly. No deadline need be immediately imposed and, although the
uncertainty and pain of separation for the remaining spouse is great, the church must
counsel patience. Allow time for the Holy Spirit to work in both spouses.

B. Resources.

1. Books

Baker, Don, Beyond Forgiveness - the healing touch of church Discipline,
Mulnomah Press.
Buzzard, Lynn and Lawrence Eck, Tell It To The Church, David C. Cook
Publishing Company.
Elliott, Elizabeth, Discipline, The Glad Surrender, Revell.
Gage, Joy P. & Kenneth G., Restoring Fellowship, Moody Press.
MacNair, Donald J., Restoration God's Way, Great Commission
Publications.
Schaeffer, Francis A., The Church Before the Watching World, Inter Varsity.
White, John and Blue, Ken, Healing the Wounds, the costly love of church
Discipline, Inter-Varsity.
Wray, Daniel E., Biblical Church Discipline, The Banner of Truth Trust.

2. Pamphlets

Buzzard, Lynn, "Readiness For Reconciliation, A Biblical Guide", published
by the Christian Conciliation Service, a ministry of the Christian Legal
Society, P.O. Box 2059, Oak Park, IL 60303.
Cassity, C. Fred, Chairman of Mediation/Arbitration Subcommittee,
Christian Legal Society, "The resolution of disputes between Christians",
published by the Christian Legal Society, P.O. Box 2069, Oak Park, IL
. 60303.'
Gilchrist, Paul, editor, Divorce And Remarriage, Documents of Synod,
RPCES, p. 199.

IV. PASTORAL CARE AND COUNSEL OF THOSE SEEKING REMARRIAGE

A. Understanding the person seeking remarriage

1. Know the times

Scripture tells us to know the times. We are to understand our culture, the change,
and the people who respond to those factors. With first-time marriages ending in
divorce at a fifty percent (50%) rate and second marriages failing at a much higher rate,
the church cannot avoid the resulting issues and problems. One issue is the fact that

<a id="ga20-p585"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=587 printed_page=585 -->

people will seek remarriage. These couples will approach the church, will seek counsel
of the pastor, and will ask to be married.

The church will have to give spiritual direction to these people, minister to the
families of the divorced, and make biblical decisions concerning the remarriage of a
growing number of people. It is, therefore, incumbent upon the church and the local
pastor to be aware of the times, to seek knowledge of the issues involved, and to make
the Bible relevant to the life and struggle of the divorced.

2. Know the people

When one or more of the parties seeking to be remarried approaches the church to
perform the ceremony, the pastor or counselor should be aware of the tensions,
struggles, anxieties, and euphoria that may be taking place in the once-married party.

a. The emotional state

Depending upon the person and the length of time he or she has been divorced, the
party desiring remarriage may be experiencing the following emotions which the pastor
must somehow help the party work through, come to acceptance of, and apply biblical
solutions to.

(1) Euphoria

The party may be on an emotional high. He or she may see the future spouse as
God's special gift to him or her and an answer to prayer and to the frustrations of single
life. Elated with the prospect of remarriage, the person may become blinded to issues
he or she never dealt with in the previous marriage. The party may become numb to his
or her own faults and the faults of his potential partner. Such numbness is a failure to
realize that marriage is to be a reflection of Christ's marriage to His church. As a
reflection, earthly marriage is to become a Christ-centered institution with each party
seeking to love the Savior more by ministering his love to the other.

(2) Anxiety

The once married person may be experiencing anxiety. He or she was emotionally
hurt in the first marriage and is a bit ambivalent to proceed with another. This person
may feel pressured into this marriage by the future spouse who has dreamed of a
blessed relationship for some time. Anxiety may indicate that the person has not
completely worked through the process of loss (divorce being a loss), has not
adequately "deconstructed" his prior marriage to come face to face with his own faults,
has entered his present relationship too quickly after divorce, or is not entirely
convinced he or she should be remarried. Sufficient time should be taken (some studies
suggest two years) to insure that anew marriage rests on a solid foundation.

<a id="ga20-p586"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=588 printed_page=586 -->

(3) Fear

The formerly married party may be experiencing fear which makes it hard for us to
take the next step. He or she may fear falling into the old patterns of the past that
contributed to the prior divorce. Or the fear may be directed at the future spouse
becoming like the former. Or the fear may have to do with being a step-parent, an
absentee parent, ora parent of a blended family. These are normal fears that need to be
resolved, faced, or accepted.

(4) Anger

Anger is a common emotion seen in the formerly married. This emotion may be
overt or held inside. If inside, bitterness may take root, and bitterness is like an acid
that eats the container (the person) from the inside out. The anger or bitterness may be
directed at the former spouse or in-laws because of a hotly contested divorce,
disagreement over parental right and responsibilities, or personally inflicted innuendos
and emotional pain. It is important for the formerly married to attempt at least a
reconciliation of friendship. If bitterness is involved, the party should ask for
forgiveness of the bitterness even if it is provoked by the former spouse.

(5) Guilt

The formerly married may still be carrying guilt from the former marriage. Now
walking more closely with the Lord, he or she may have been convicted of past sins,
faults, and unkindnesses. He or she may see remarriage as the opportunity to make
amends for past sins. But this is not a reason for marriage. The person needs to confess
the sins causing the guilt, seek forgiveness from the party he hurt, and attempt at least a
reconciliation of friendship.

(6) Stubbornness

This is more of an attitude than a feeling, but the pastor should be aware that some
formerly married people will not care what the church says. he or she is hereto be
remarried, the church has no business in his or her former life, and no one can require
him or her to submit to counseling. This person is basically present in the church or in
the pastor's office by the request of the future spouse. A contumacious behavior is
sinful and must be confronted with loving discipline if the person is a member of the
church. If not, the church should counsel the future spouse, who is a member, about its
concerns and beliefs that marriage is not appropriate at this time.

b. The cognitive state

The tendency of the formerly married will be to make decisions based upon one or
more of the above emotional states. Good cognitive judgment based upon scriptural
principles gets clouded by the emotions. God created mankind to emote, to experience
the entire range of emotions. If man has been created with emotions, emotions are,
therefore, good. But one definition of evil is the abuse, misuse, or perversion of
anything good. In man's fallen state emotions are easily abused and misused. And

<a id="ga20-p587"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=589 printed_page=587 -->

because people feel intensely and desire to feel good, they will tend to make choices
based upon how they feel or what they desire to feel.

The pastoral counselor should recognize the tendency, point out areas where
choices were made based on feelings, and direct his counselees to Scripture in order to
think God's thoughts and make choices based on God's will.

c. The relational state

All human beings were created to relate to God and to each other. Their
motivational thirsts for security and significance were to be satisfied in God and his
design for His creation. Man and woman were created to complete and complement
each other - to give each other a soul oneness. Since the Fall, this oneness has been
disrupted. The thirst for security and significance became misdirected. Sin entered the
world and self-centeredness became the norm. Men and women still want security and
significance, but sin causes them to seek it by illegitimate means, i.e., not through God's
constructed order.

A formerly married person may see the future spouse as filling the void which he
or she has been experiencing. A man may see his future wife as providing the
significance he needs. Or a woman may view her future husband as satisfying the
security she desires. Now, there is nothing wrong with having security and significance
in a marriage, but if these thirsts are sought to be satisfied outside of the Main Thirst
Quencher, God, they will never be fully satisfied.

Relationship, therefore, has to be first established with the One who is the fountain
of living waters and secondly, with people who are at times God's vessels to carry His
thirst-quenching water to those seeking the oasis of life in a second marriage. The
formerly married (as well as all of us) may have the tendency to be focused more on the
human relationship and not on his or her relationship with Christ Jesus.

3. Know the ministry

When a formerly married person approaches the pastor in order to be remarried,
the pastor is encouraged to seek understanding of the emotional state of such a person,
how he or she may come to the decision of remarriage and how the pull to relate with
another may cloud his or her relationship with the Savior. The pastor is the shepherd of
his people and must know his sheep. as difficult a sit may seem, the shepherd is to
have an understanding of counseling his sheep. If he doesn't, he must seek training,
have others in his congregation aid in the shepherding (and train them), or refer to
people skilled in the field of counseling.

The pastor is a busy man. His job is to equip the saints for ministry, but he can't
equip if he has never been equipped himself. More and more people will seek to be
remarried. The pastor is the first person to whom they will come. if he is not equipped
to minister to them, to make the Bible relevant to the issues they face, he must seek to
be equipped by reading various resources, attending appropriate seminars, or bringing
in an expert to teach him and his congregation.

<a id="ga20-p588"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=590 printed_page=588 -->

B. Guidelines for remarriage

The local Session should establish its guidelines for remarriage. The position the
church takes will clear up much confusion about the possibility of remarriage. The
couple approaching the pastor for marriage can be handed a set of guidelines. The
pastor can explain that the Session has made this a policy of the church. This will take
pressure off him if there is a question about marrying the couple. The pastor should not
be left ina position where heist he sole determinant in the remarriage of a couple. The
following are suggested guidelines for remarriage which a local Session may adopt,
modify, or just use as a reference.

1. Where the former spouse is deceased, remarriage is permitted. Romans 7:2
"For the married woman is bound by law to her husband while he is living;
but if her husband dies, she is released from the law concerning the
husband."

1 Corinthians 7:39 "A wife is bound as long as her husband lives; but if her
husband is dead, she is free to be married to whom she wishes, but only in the
Lord."

2. Where divorce occurred prior to one's conversion, it is unclear whether the
believer may remarry.

Note:
The Committee was divided in its opinion regarding related questions. A
majority maintained, for example, that a Christian who was divorced during
the time of his or her unbelief was obligated to seek reconciliation with the
former spouse even though still an unbeliever. In their view, some of the
Lord's statements in Matthew 19 and Paul's in 1 Corinthians 7 are based on
the binding obligation of the original marriage. The minority felt, contrarily,
that the requirement to marry only in the Lord took precedence. Again, the
majority, by a similar principle, held that two divorced unbelievers, upon their
conversion, are obligated to remarry one another. The minority, believing
such a marriage to be, in fact, a new marriage, did not admit that obligation.

In the case of those who hold that the believer may remarry, but only in the
Lord, the reasoning is followed:

(1) 2 Corinthians 5:17 "Therefore, if any mani sin Christ, he is anew
creation; the old things passed away; behold, new things have come".
(a) When a person has experienced the new birth, all sin is forgiven and
all condemnation removed (Romans 8:1).
(b) Therefore, divorce prior to conversion doesn't preclude a remarriage
to a Christian mate.
(c) Similarly, conversion does not necessarily require remarriage to a
former spouse.

<a id="ga20-p589"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=591 printed_page=589 -->

(2) The Point: Jesus is in the ministry of reconciliation. We, his disciples,
should reflect his ministry. Furthermore, repentance ('shuv') has the
element of returning and going back in the opposite direction. This
direction is back toward relationship with the offended party, vertically
with God and horizontally with people. The church, therefore, should
strongly encourage a healing of any difficulties with a former spouse.

3. Where the Session or its representatives has determined that the divorce had
occurred on Scriptural grounds, remarriage is permitted for the party sinned
against.

Matthew 19:9 "And I say to you, whoever divorces his wife, except for
immorality, and marries another commits adultery."

1 Corinthians 7:15 "Yet if the unbelieving one leaves, let him leave; and
brother or sister is not under bondage in such cases; but God has called us to
peace."

4. Where a former spouse has remarried and the Session or its representatives is
convinced that the parties seeking remarriage are bom-again, remarriage is
permitted.

Reasoning: Regardless of the reasons for the divorce or who was the
offending party, if remarriage has occurred, the marital union is
permanently broken. Marriage could never occur between the parties
(Deuteronomy 24:1-4). Reconciliation is, therefore, impossible and the
remaining former partner is eligible to remarry.

5. Where a Christian causes his or her marriage to end in divorce on non-biblical
grounds, remarriage may be permitted only if the former spouse has remarried
or has died, and the future spouse is bom-again.

Note:
See Note above in B.2.

6. Where a "professing Christian" spouse has left his or her spouse, the offended
party may seek a divorce and remarry only after discipline under the
guidelines of Matthew 18 and the Book of Church Order has been prosecuted
to its conclusion; and the Session has ecclesiastically decided to treat the
offending spouse as an unbeliever (Matthew 18:17).

C. Concerns of those in the congregation who have been divorced

1. Will a divorced person be allowed to participate in various activities and
service opportunities in the church?

Answer: Divorce in and of itself need not preclude opportunities to be
involved in the church, except insofar a sit may preclude a man holding a

<a id="ga20-p590"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=592 printed_page=590 -->

church office or other leadership position. As far as service
opportunities are concerned, spiritual, psychological and relational
maturity as well as giftedness are the primary requisites. The Session
will have to make the evaluations on a case by case basis. A person's
divorce may be considered as only one part of the evaluation process.
The primary consideration should be the person’s reputation in the
church and the local community, not his or her divorce.

2. will there be a stigma placed upon a divorced person?

Answer: Stigmas are the result of individual biases. The Session should do
all it can to remove any stigma. It should attempt to assimilate divorced
people into its membership by involvement on Sunday morning,
explaining who they are, the difficulties they have and the need for the
church to accept them openly and warmly into the fellowship.

D. Practical considerations for ministering to those contemplating
remarriage

1. Require the couple to submit to pre-marital counseling which should cover
the following subjects:

a. A frank discussion of the prior marriage and pitfalls.

Reasoning: Before a new marriage is attempted, the person seeking
remarriage should "deconstruct" his prior marriage. he or she needs to
break it apart, face the old issues and patterns, and confront the person he
or she was and may still be. This is a painful process, but if a new
relationship is to last, the former married must analyze his or her former
way of thinking and responding to an unpleasant situation. Such an
activity and process will also help the person work through any grief
process not yet completed. Divorce is a loss. It is a heart-wrenching
experience that needs a time of healing in order to bring one to
acceptance of the divorce, of the f ina liza ti on of a relationship, and of
oneself as being okay in the economy of God (if God's forgiveness is
obtained).

b. An honest discussion on sexuality

Reasoning: Often men and women don't really understand each other.
A couple should seek to understand how each sex views the other, and
how to be sensitive to each other's needs. A study of the Song of
Solomon would be very beneficial.

c. A look at personalities and temperaments

Reasoning: Personality testing (like the Myers/Briggs Test) may be
given with proper and adequate explanation to follow. God has created

<a id="ga20-p591"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=593 printed_page=591 -->

us all differently. If we are to minister properly to our spouse, we need
to know his or her personality. We are commanded by Scripture to
understand our spouse. Testing is a tool which aids us in this endeavor.

Temperament testing (like the Taylor/Johnson Temperament Analysis)
may help the couple to see areas of weakness, compatibility and
potential problems in dispute resolution.

Either a pastor will have to be trained to give and interpret these tests or
he will have to ask a local counselor to perform the task.

d. An in-depth look at biblical responsibilities

Reasoning: It is astonishing how little married couples know about
their biblical responsibilities and their roles as husband or wife. It is the
responsibility of the church to teach each party what their biblical job
description is and how to accomplish it. For instance, what does it mean
for a husband to love his wife as Christ loved the church? Or what is the
meaning of biblical submission?

e. A teaching on the different kinds of love that must be practiced in
marriage

Reasoning: If you were to ask the average person to give you a
definition of love, he or she would invariably describe something that
had the concept of caring for another. Well, that is partially correct, but
when we read the Scripture in its original languages, we discover many
words for love, each having a different meaning. How do these words
relate to marriage? if a marriage is to last, the parties need to be loving
ina number of different ways.

f. A teaching of vows

Reasoning: People in this society have not taken commitments
seriously. a broken promise is not a big thing to people. but it is to
God. People who are seeking remarriage have taken vows before, but
the everlasting nature of them was not fulfilled. What makes this "go-
round" any different? The seriousness of taking a vow before God must
be stressed.

g. A discussion, teaching, and practice of communication

Reasoning: The biggest complaint of spouses is a lack of
communication. "My husband just doesn't listen to me", complains the
wife. "Oh, yeah," responds the husband, "She doesn't understand me".
Pastors and counselors must teach the skills of communication as well as
establish for his counselees ground rules for good healthy arguments.

<a id="ga20-p592"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=594 printed_page=592 -->

h. An honest discussion of the problems that normally occur in blended
families

Reasoning: Remarriage often brings two families together. One spouse
becomes the step-parent to the other’s children. Occasionally, there is a
mixture of children from both parents living under the same roof. Such a
situation produces a new dynamic and creates additional tensions and
problems.

i. Encouragement to reconcile a friendship with the former spouse when
possible

Reasoning: Although remarriage to a former spouse may be
impossible, the party seeking remarriage needs to attempt a
reconciliation of friendship with the former spouse. Friendship may
never be attained, but the attempt should be made. The purpose for such
an act is to complete the process of healing the loss occurred in divorce,
to complete any process of forgiveness still needed, and to benefit the
children if there are any.

NOTE: There are other subjects which undoubtedly should be covered.
However, the process of preparing a person for remarriage is not a quick
and easy one. A pastor may develop his own methodology, train lay
people to help, or add to the subjects to be discussed.

2. Encourage the parties to discover and use their spiritual gifts.

Reasoning: This helps them to see in what way God has graced them, and
gives them direction in the areas of their use to the church. Once tested, plug
them into the appropriate ministry in your church.

3. Place them in a small group (preferably a group with the same or similar
affinities).

Reasoning: This helps to assimilate them into the church and fosters
acceptance within the church community.

4. Encourage them to participate in Sunday School and various church
functions.

Reasoning: This helps them to feel part of the church body and aids in
removing any stigma they may feel as being formerly married.

5. Once the person is remarried, introduce the person and the new spouse one
Sunday morning as newly married.

Reasoning: It helps complete the process of assimilation into the church
membership. It shows the members that the leadership supports the couple.

<a id="ga20-p593"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=595 printed_page=593 -->

It aids in the removal of stigma caused by the prior divorce. It enhances the
couple's acceptance by the local church body.

E. Resources

1. Personnel

a. While the Elders may never abrogate their primary responsibility to the
flock, they may for reasons sufficient to themselves refer them to a local
counselor to do the counseling and/or administer the testing required.
Prior to use of or referral to any counselor, determine the counselor's
approach to therapy. Find out where and how the Bible fits into the
counselor's philosophy of therapy. If you disagree or have reservations,
do not refer to that counselor.

b. Pastors may seek help from those who are more experienced in
counseling.

2. Seminars
(See H.D.2., p. 2361)

3. Books

To have a better understanding of biblical anthropology;

(See II. D. 3., p. 2362)

To gain, insight in counseling couples for marriage and remarriage;

Stohman, Robert F. and Hiebert, William J., Premarital Counseling,
Lexington Books, D. C. Heath and Company.
Wright, H. Norman, Premarital Counseling, Moody Press.

To help determine if a person has gone through steps of reconciliation:

Jones, John Edward. Reconciliation, Bethany House Publishers.
Talley, Jim. Reconciliation Differences, Thomas Nelson Publishers.

To build a biblical marriage:

(See II. D. 3., p. 2362)

To understand one's sexuality;

(See II. D. 3., p. 2362)

<a id="ga20-p594"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=596 printed_page=594 -->

To understand the single parent:

Barnes, Robert G. Jr., Single Parenting, Tyndale House.
Smoke, Jim, Living Beyond Divorce, the possibilities of Remarriage,
Harvest House.
Mowday, Lois, The Snare, Nav Press.
Brown, Michael A., Second Class Christians? A New Approach to the
dilemma of divorced people in the Church, Intervarsity Press.

### V. PASTORAL CARE AND COUNSEL OF THE CHILDREN OF DIVORCED

PARENTS

A. Understanding the child of divorced parents

1. Know the times

The single-parent family is the most rapidly growing family form in America.
Since 1960 the female-headed family has doubled and is outgrowing the typical
husband-wife family a ta rate of two and a halftimes faster. One out of every five
school age children lives in a single parent household. Furthermore, it has been
estimated that as many as fifty percent (50%) of all children born in the next ten years
will experience the loss of a parent (mostly the father) through divorce. For most of the
affected children, divorce will be experienced as a personal, familial, and social loss.

Since remarriage is quite common within a few years, these children will be faced
with still more emotional struggles - the remarriage of a parent, the living with a step
parent, and/or the living in a blended family (i.e., a family with children from two or
more different families).

Pre-marital counseling of those seeking remarriage should, therefore, include frank
discussions of the potential or present problems that children will or may be
experiencing. Most remarriages have not given adequate consideration to the
psychological, social, or familial effects upon the children. Since most pastors are not
and will never be experts in the counseling of children, it is recommended that a child
psychologist or similar expert be solicited to help counsel children and instruct the
couple seeking remarriage of the present or potential problems that such a remarriage
may expect.

2. Know the People

It is not the intent of this committee's report to make pastors experts on children of
divorced parents. A pastor is wise to seek aid and assistance from those whose
ministries are directed toward children and adolescents. What the pastor should
understand is the various emotional states that such children may experience in order to
properly counsel the parent and to determine if the child needs help.

<a id="ga20-p595"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=597 printed_page=595 -->

Children have little or no say in the divorce of their parents. Yet the hurt they
must endure is enormous. They are not as resilient as the modern-day libertines would
have us believe. Studies are showing that the emotional scars from the trauma still
remain years later. The following are some reactions and feelings by children to the
divorce of their parents.

a. Resentment

Since they feel the tension and experience the turmoil of divorce, children tend to
become resentful toward one or more parents and/or toward God. They may think,
"Why did they bring me into the world? I didn't ask to be bom? Why didn't God do
something to bring my Daddy back? It isn't fair". Or they resent the new step-parent
who tries to fill the shoes of the lost parent. They may think, "Look, I didn't ask for him
to be my father. You picked him out. I don’t have to like him or even cooperate with
him".

b. Anger

Anger is a little stronger than resentment. Bitterness could be taking root. Older
children may experience this more deeply and act it out with behavior that is obnoxious,
unkind, inconsiderate, stubborn, and at times violent.

c. Guilt

Some children tend to blame themselves for their parents' failure. They may have
heard their name called out in an argument or felt the angered look of a parent and took
it personally. They may have thought it was their stubborn or disobedient behavior that
caused a fight which eventually ended in divorce. Small children are especially tender
and susceptible to taking the heavy burden of the marriage failure on their own
shoulders.

d. Fear

A child's emotional and economic security is shattered by the breakup of his
parents. He becomes fearful of the future. "Will I see Daddy anymore? Will I be
loved? Where will we live? What about my friends?" are all questions that may arise.
The best security a child has are two loving parents who nurture him to the point of
facing the world alone. Divorce fractures this and thrusts the child into a cold and cruel
world before he is ready. One parent can never give the total security a child needs.
And so fear can easily enter the child's psyche.

e. Depression

Experiencing the collapse of his familial world, the child can sink into depression.
If his own little world (the family system) couldn't protect him, what can? The child
may look at himself as worthless. "If i were abetter or different kid, Dad would have
stayed", he may think. His self-worth is lowered, and positive reinforcement can't come
from the parent from whom he needs it most — the parent who isn't there. Fear may

<a id="ga20-p596"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=598 printed_page=596 -->

also contribute to the depression. Older children may develop a fear of commitment
(They saw betrayal.) or fear of falling in love (They saw a bad result.) ora fear of
making decisions (They saw wrong ones made.). All these emotions add to the
withdrawal of the child into himself, and then he becomes a prime candidate for
depression which may even lead to suicide.

f. Lack of love

Children almost always feel the loss of love when their parents divorce, even when
one parent is showering them with affection and consoling them with the loss of the
other parent. Children innately know that love does not walk away from personal
responsibility. When the leaving parent says, "I love you and always will," the affected
child sees these words as hollow. What he is thinking is, "Oh yeah, if you really loved
me, you would work this out with mommy." Love seeks answers, not excuses, and
either parent usually comes up with excuses.

In the same manner, when a parent wants to remarry, the child could be thinking,
"If she really loved me, she wouldn't marry him, or she would ask Daddy back, or she
wouldn’t want to bring him into our little nest."

g. Loss

Children of divorced parents may feel cheated. They experience loss -- of
companionship of a parent, of celebrating holidays together, of establishing family
traditions, of family structure, of economic stability, of normal existence. One teenager
asked her mother a hundred times why she and her father divorced. The answer she
kept hearing was, "Everybody is happier this way.” Well, this teen wasn't happier. She
missed her dad's hugs, the walks in the park with him, the fun times together. Divorce
is usually the result of selfishness, and so, because of the self-centeredness of one or
more parent, the children suffer loss.

h. Confusion

Divorce abruptly changes life which causes children to experience confusion and
conflict. Not knowing what caused the divorce or what was going on, children are
suddenly put in a quandary. This confusion stays with them for a long period of time.

And if a new marriage brings in children from the step-parent, conflict usually
results. Children invariably think the step-parent favors his or her own children. They,
therefore, feel less love and complain to their natural parent who usually takes their side
and speaks to the step-parent, who disagrees. Before you know it, there is turmoil
between the parents and the children.

Discipline is another problem area in blended families. One parent has normally
not disciplined his or her children as sternly as the other. In fact, he or she may have
been quite lax. Now, when the step-dad disciplines his step-children who were not used
to the method nor the intensity, the natural mom may complain, demand he not
discipline "her" kids, or defend "her" children.

<a id="ga20-p597"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=599 printed_page=597 -->

a problem in discipline leads to a problem with authority. A problem with
authority leads to confusion and problems in relationships.

i. Being different

Some children feel that they are not like the other kids anymore. They can't do
what they used to do. The school may have a "Dad's Day" and Dad isn't there to
participate. There may not be any money to participate in a favorite sport or buy the
dress for the prom. Older children may have to baby-sit younger ones and, therefore,
can't linger with friends after school.

Not only may they feel different, they may feel isolated because of their
difference. Because they can't linger with friends, they may not get invited to the
special parties or outings or social events. It is not uncommon for these children to feel
lonely and helpless.

3. Know the ministry

To help single-parents and their children cope with their situation and to foster a
better relationship for families of the remarried, the church must provide services and
programs that meet the special needs of the children and the parents. Possible programs
are single-parent support groups, children's peer support groups, parenting classes,
latch-key programs after-school teen activities, counseling referrals, counseling
programs, divorce recovery workshops, Pioneer or Awana programs, adult home Bible
groups, and service-oriented projects.

Parents have to be encouraged to pursue social and physical activities, especially
those that involve peers. The tendency of a single parent is to withdraw because of lack
of energy, low motivation, or smothering of the child. Once remarried, the couple
needs to be continually active, particularly with other couples.

B. Practical considerations for ministering to those contemplating
remarriage when children are involved.

1.Require the person with children to make a list of the problems he or she
thinks each child is having at present as a result of the prior divorce or
loss of a parent.

- **a.** Have the fiance' make a separate list based on his or her observations.
- **b.** Compare these lists and bring up other areas of possibilities such as various emotional states of children of divorce.
- **c.** Be frank in your discussions because the children are an integral part to remarriage. Remind the future step-parent that when he or she marries the parent, the children are part of the package.
- **d.** Suggest methods to overcome some of the problem areas — which should include the seeking of family counseling.

<a id="ga20-p598"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=600 printed_page=598 -->

2. Require the person with children to make a list of potential problems or
foreseeable conflicts as a result of this remarriage.

- **a.** Have the fiance' do the same.
- **b.** Compare lists and see how realistic they are.
- **c.** Discuss openly the potential problem areas and formulate a plan to prevent them from occurring or to overcome them if they do occur.

3. Require that the children visit with the pastor.

- **a.** Explore their feelings about the divorce, about their future step parent, and about their relationship with both natural parents.
- **b.** Determine if they need professional counseling.

4. Encourage the parent to have his or her children involved with the
church youth programs, including Sunday Schools.

- **a.** Have the youth leaders monitor their participation and social adaptation.
- **b.** Have youth leaders encourage other children to socialize with them.
- **c.** Consider establishing a peer counseling program at your church since kids will more readily talk with peers than with adults.
- **d.** Encourage your youth leaders to:

(1) Visit the child at his or her home.
(2) Call the child and let him know he is missed when he is sick or
could not attend a youth function. Or send the child a "We
missed you" postcard from the youth group.
(3) Assure the child that the youth leader is always available to
talk.
(4) Attend athletic events, special activities, and/or school plays in
which the child is involved.
(5) Send birthday cards.
(6) Demonstrate unconditional love at all times especially when
the child is frustrating.
(7) Pray daily for the specific needs of the child and ask God for
wisdom to touch the life of this child in a unique way.
( 8) Give the child personal attention outside the normal youth
activities. Take him to a ballgame. Go out for ice cream.

e. Have the church sponsor after-school programs.

5. Encourage the parent and potential step-parent to participate with the
children in various church activities.

6. Encourage the parent to maintain social friendships and participate in
fellowship activities without the children.

<a id="ga20-p599"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=601 printed_page=599 -->

7. If remarriage is decided upon, have a ceremony which recognizes and
includes the step-children. (See suggested Ceremony below.)

C. Resources

1. Personnel

- **a.** A local counselor could be of great help. Prior to any referral or request for aid, determine the counselor's relationship with Christ, his or her approach to therapy, and how the Bible fits into this approach.
- **b.** A trained lay person who loves kids, has had experience in ministering to them, and is willing to help them overcome the difficulties in divorce and remarriage should be sought, encouraged, and used in the church’s ministry.

2. Ministries

a. Fresh Start Seminars, Inc.
751 North Wayne Avenue
Wayne, PA 19087
800-882-2799
b. Dad, The Family Shepherd
P.O. Box 21445
Little Rock, AR 72221
c. Rainbows for All God's Children
1111 Tower Road
Schaumburg, IL 60173

3. Books

To help understand children of divorce:

Barr, Debbie, Caught in the Crossfire, Pyranee Books.
Hart, Archibald, Children and Divorce, Word Publishing.
Johnson, Laurence and Rosenfeld, Georglyn, Divorced Kids, Thomas
Nelson Publishing.
Wallenstein, Judith and Blakeslee, Second Chance, Ticknor & Fields.

To help understand the changed family dynamic:

Nordtvedt, Matilda, Daddy Isn't Coming Home, Zondervan.
Spilke, Francine Susan, The Family That Changed: A Child's Book
About Divorce, Crown.
Phillips, Carolyn E., Our Family Got Divorced, Regal Books.
Danziger, Paula, The Divorce Express, Delacorte Publishing Co.

<a id="ga20-p600"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=602 printed_page=600 -->

To help children cope:

Stein, Sarah Bonnett, On Divorce: An Open Family Book for Parents
and Children Together, Walker and Co.
Berger, Terry, A Friend Can Help, Advanced Learning concepts.
Rofes, Eric E., Editor, The Kids' book of Divorce, Lewis Publishing Co.
Berger, Teny, How Does It Feel When Your Parents Get Divorced?
Julian Messner/Simon and Schuster Publishing Co.

D. Addendum:

Ceremony For Recognition Of Children At Remarriage

This part of a remarriage ceremony may be inserted after the prayer for
blessing the covenantal union and before the lighting of the unity candle. In
any event, it should be inserted prior to the declaration of marriage.

RECOGNITION OF CHILDREN

Minister: The ring(s) that you have exchanged symbolizes the bond and
commitment that you (groom) and you (bride)_____
have just made. As we bring praise for the bringing of you two together,
we also give thanks for the merging of families. as a result of your
union, you (whichever party is becoming a step-parent to live-in
children)________ have committed yourself to rearing_________
(children’s name) in the nurture and admonition of the Lord.
As an Israelite was to take in his deceased brother's family and raise the
children within his own family environment, so, too, have you agreed to
take in as your own the child of _______ (groom or bride)______ .

BRING CHILDREN FORWARD (Young ones may be carried by
grandparents or close friends.)

Minister: As part of the family which the bonds of matrimony have united,
we recognize (children) and the significant role he/she/they
play(s) in this marriage today celebrated. The love and the hope which
God sends to you through the gift of children find expression in Psalm
127:3-5.

Behold, children are a gift of the Lord;
The fruit of the womb is a reward.
Like arrows in the hand of a warrior,
So are the children on one's youth.
How blessed is the man whose quiver is full of them;
They shall not be ashamed,
When they speak with their enemies in the gate.

<a id="ga20-p601"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=603 printed_page=601 -->

EXPLANATION OF THE MEDALLION *

Minister: i understand you , (groom) and you , (bride) have
a medallion to present to (children) . The medallion has
engraved upon it three intertwined circles which represent the linkage of
all members of this family into a bond of love. It also depicts the way in
which children are a part of the family unit —not alone or separated from
their parent and step-parent, but an integral part of a relationship which
begins today. Each time (children) look(s) upon the
medallion, he/she could be reminded of the love both parents have for
him/her.

PRESENTATION OF THE FAMILY MEDALLION (OR NECKLACE)

Minister: do you (groom) and you (bride) now wish to
present a family medallion (or necklace) to (children) as a
symbol for family unity and _____ (children's name) love?

Bride and Groom: "We do."

Minister: Take the medallion(s) [or necklace(s)] from the Best Man and
place it (them) upon each child repeating after me these words in unison:

Bride and Groom: (repeat after minister):

"We pledge our continuing love for you (name) ,
(name) , and we promise to cherish you/ and to hold you
close to our hearts./ We promise to raise you/ in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord/ and to give you the security/ of a family in
Christ."

PRAYER FOR THE FAMILY

(Have children remain standing — some with the Best Man and some
with Bridesmaids. When the couple is presented and they leave to
proceed from the church, have the children follow after them and the
wedding party after the children.)

SPECIAL MUSIC (optional)

NOTE: Proceed to part of service that has the lighting of the Unity Candle.

* Medallion information: Rev. Roger Coleman, % The Westport Allen Center,
706 West 42nd Street, Kansas City, MO 64111, (816) 753-3886

<a id="ga20-p602"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=604 printed_page=602 -->

VI. The Church's Ministry to the Separated and Divorced

A. Understanding the separated and divorced

1. Know the times

The single parent family is the fastest growing in the United States. During the
past two decades, the single parent household, i.e., the separated or divorced has
increased at a rate 2 1/2 times that of a two-parent family, along with the rapid growth
has come an awareness that single mothers are experiencing a considerable amount of
emotional and psychological stress. Added to these stresses are the anxieties felt from
rejection in the churches. The separated and divorced have complained about being
treated as second class citizens in the family of God.

The church will have to give both spiritual direction to these people, minister to
them and their children, and give practical wisdom to them for coping with life's
struggles.

2. Know the people

a. The emotional state

The separated and divorced person experiences many varied emotions, some of
which are similar in description as those listed in Section IV. A. 2. a. (Pastoral Care and
Counsel of Those Seeking Remarriage), but different in intensity. For example, fear
and anxiety are quite prevalent and attack the single parent in an acute way. Fear of the
future, what will happen next, whether happiness will ever occur are haunting thoughts
which can paralyze the individual. Fear of loneliness and not being accepted by former
friends or church members may preoccupy the separated. The tendency will be to make
choices based upon these fears and not upon good cognitive judgment. Wanting to feel
secure and significant will lead them to wrong decisions and inappropriate friendships.

b. The cognitive state

See IV. A. 2. b. Two possibilities could occur in the exercise of the cognitive
functions. The separated may make decisions based on his or her will to please, for the
desire to overcome loneliness and make friendships is a strong survival instinct. The
wrong friendships, or a quick marriage could result.

On the other hand, the separated or divorced may make decisions based on the hurt
or guilt he or she may feel. This will normally catapult them into depression or
isolation. They don't want to be around people; so they take themselves out of the
mainstream to avoid further hurt.

The pastoral counselor should recognize the tendencies, encourage proper choices,
and bring them to a point where they can risk further hurt.

<a id="ga20-p603"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=605 printed_page=603 -->

c. The relational state

See IV. A. 2. c. Separated and divorced people still need to relate. Since God
created them as relational beings they must continue to exercise this capacity and
become involved with others. Withdrawal from relationships is a strong possibility.
The church must prevent this.

3. Know the ministry

The pastor as the shepherd of his flock should realize that the separated and
divorced feel estranged from the church and its members. They may think they have
been stigmatized or branded as second class citizens. In fact, there are church members
who are predisposed against them. The pastor needs to root out the bias and plug the
separated and divorced into the ministries of the church. He should solicit session
members to aid him in the assimilation of the separated and divorced into the
membership of the church as well as the appropriate ministries of the church.

Of course, the session will have to make evaluations on a case by case basis
whether a separated person may undertake a ministry. For instance, if reconciliation to
a spouse or former spouse has been proposed, then the person should be working on the
matters that would heal the marriage. Involvement in a ministry may hinder the
process.

Furthermore, a person may be in an unrepentant state of sin. If so, then
participation in a church ministry or program would be inappropriate. In fact, the
process of discipline should have commenced.

B. Guidelines for ministry

1. Converse with the separated and divorced.

Many people who have become or who are in the process of divorce have felt
themselves unseen, unknown, and untouched by the church. Even though most
churches benignly neglect these people, neglect is still painful.

It is wrong to assume that the separated or divorced prefer silence on the subject of
their marriage or the position in which they find themselves. Talking to them shows
concern, and concern care. They already are treated like lepers by some friends. They
surely don't want to be lepers in the church.

Conversing with them doesn’t mean to force yourself on them. Pray for
opportunities to speak, but in any event show cordiality and sincerity in greeting them if
only in passing.

Do not worry what to say to them. Even if your words are "I just didn't know what
to say", they convey concern. And remember, divorced people really don't need your
guidance and wisdom nearly so much as the warmth of your smile and the sincerity of
your words.

<a id="ga20-p604"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=606 printed_page=604 -->

2. Act on their behalf.

If you sincerely care for the separated and divorced person, you will act on his or
her behalf. if he or she needs a place to live, help him or her find it. if a shoulder is
needed to cry on, give him or her yours. Introduce him or her to people who could help
meet a need.

3. Include them in activities and ministries.

The reason why most separated and divorced people feel like they don't fit in is
because in many churches they don't. Most church ministries focus on families, not the
divorced or single parent. Most church functions are designed around family activities.

It is not specialized programs, as helpful as they are, that these people need.
Rather a genuine awareness of their existence among the congregation is needed more.
They need love and the feeling of belonging. So encourage congregants to include
them in special activities, to invite them to special events and programs, and to ask
them to their homes.

As a church, include them in ministry opportunities. They want to feel part of the
team, contribute to the goals of the team, and make themselves useful to the team. Let
them serve in some capacity, for serving is conforming to the image of Christ. And the
job of the pastor is to disciple his sheep so that they do mature in Christ.

4. Reach out and touch them.

The separated and divorced have been deeply hurt and in some cases greatly
traumatized by their divorce and the splitting of families. They need people to
acknowledge their hurt, give them a hug, and to extend warmth and acceptance. These
brothers and sisters more than others need to be physically touched. Yet when a godly
brother or sister hugs a person of the opposite sex, sexual innuendos rush to the surface
and rumors fly about.

Divorced people often feel they have become a threat to other marriages. Those
who are insecure and have rocky marriages are the ones who fan the gossip fires. This
is a shame, for the body of Christ is to hurt with each other and rejoice with each other.
When the arm suffers, the whole body hurts. What often happens in churches is that the
arm is hurting and the rest of the body wants to amputate it for fear of contamination.

The separated and divorced will always be part of the church. They will be a fast
growing part of the church. In fact, most of the church families have been or will be
touched by divorce in one way or another, whether it be through direct family split or a
child of a member gets divorced. The church has the job of recognizing these people,
ministering to them, and encouraging others to fellowship with them.

<a id="ga20-p605"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=607 printed_page=605 -->

C. Resources

1. Personnel

- **a.** Local counselors may be able to give insight on ministering to the separated and divorced.
- **b.** Experts in the field may come to train pastors and lay people to do counseling and sponsor programs for the separated and divorced.

2. Seminars

a. Fresh Start Seminars, Inc.
751 North Wayne Avenue
Wayne, PA 19087
b. Fresh Start is one of several ministries that offers a three-day divorce
recovery program. it is founded by Rev. Bob Bums, Associate Pastor at
Perimeter Presbyterian Church (PCA), Atlanta, Georgia.

3. Books

To have a better understanding of biblical anthropology;

(See II. D. 3., p. 2362)

To understand the separated and divorced:

Smoke, Jim , Suddenly Single, Fleming H. Revell.

To help determine if a person has gone through steps of reconciliation;

(See IV. E. 3., p. 2377)

To help in recovering from divorce;

Augsburger, David, Caring Enough to Forgive; Caring Enough Not to
Forgive, Regal.
Burns, Bob, Through The Whirlwind: A Proven Path to Recovery From the
devastation of Divorce, Oliver Nelson. (Bob is the founder and Board
Chairman of Fresh Start Seminars, Inc.)
Smoke, Jim , Growing Through Divorce, Harvest House.

To understand the single parent:

(See IV. E. 3., p. 2377)

<a id="ga20-p606"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=608 printed_page=606 -->

To look at sex from the single perspective:

Jones, Tom, Sex and Love When You're Single Again, Oliver Nelson. (Tom
is the former pastor of Immanuel Presbyterian Church, Belleville, Illinois, and
is Associate Director of Fresh Start Seminars, Inc.)
White, John, Eros Defiled, Intervarsity Press.

<a id="ga20-p607"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=609 printed_page=607 -->

THE WESTMINSTER DIVINES ON DIVORCE FOR PHYSICAL ABUSE

by the Ad Hoc Committee of Philadelphia Presbytery
RE: Westminster Assembly's View of Divorce for Physical Abuse
Dr. William S. Barker, Chairman

Introduction.

The mandate of Philadelphia Presbytery's committee was very narrow: to seek
to know whether physical abuse of a spouse might have been in the thinking of the
Westminster Assembly as it formulated its position: "...yet nothing but adultery, or
such willful desertion as can no way be remedied by the Church or civil magistrate, is
cause sufficient of dissolving the bond of marriage...." (Westminster Confession of Faith, XXIV, 6).

Of particular help in this study have been the article by David C. Jones, "The
Westminster Confession on Divorce and Remarriage," Presbyterion XVI, 1 (Spring 1990),
17-40 (see also Minutes of the 18th General Assembly of the PCA, 1990, pp. 139-162)
and the book by Roderick Phillips, Putting Asunder: a history of divorce in western
Society (Cambridge U. Press, 1988), although the reader of this 640-page book should
be forewarned that the index is not complete (William Ames, Robert Cleaver, John
Dod, William Gouge, Herbert Palmer, and William Perkins are not included in the
index but are referred to in the text at least on pages 111-112, 118, 126, 309, and 326-
328).

The Problem. The problem confronting a study of what may have been in the
thinking of the Westminster Assembly is that the whole question of divorce was in flux
in the Reformation era, particularly and prolongedly so in England, and the most highly
regarded guides on such ethical questions could be understood as ambivalent.

For example, William Ames (1576-1633) probably the most respected
Protestant casuist of the time (see Richard Baxter, "Advertisement" and Part II, Chapter
IX, Question VII of A Christian Directory, pp. 3-4 and 444 in volume i of the
practical works of richard Baxter, London, 1838) wrote as follows in his Conscience
and the Cases Thereof (1639 and 1643) concerning "Whether or no, and how Marriage
may bee dissolved?":

A.4. There is not any just cause of making, a divorce approved in Scripture,
besides adultery and the like horrid impurities, whereby it comes to passe, that two
remaine no longer one flesh but divided; and so the faith of Wedlock, is directly
violated; Matthew 5.32. and 19.9.

A.6. An obstinate desertion, although in the party deserting, it containeth no just
cause of making a divorce, yet it makes a faire cause for the party deserted, after
the triall of all other meanes in vaine, to suffer a divorce, 1 Cor. 7:15....

<a id="ga20-p608"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=610 printed_page=608 -->

A.8. The great danger, which one party may bee in by the cruelty of the other, or
by any other manifest meanes of cohabitation, may bee just cause of retiring for a
time, so to provide for his owne safety and security, but not for an absolute
desertion, unlesse first hee bee deserted. For if one party drive away the other
with great fiercenesse and cruelty, there is cause of desertion, and he e is to be
reputed the deserter. But if hee obstinately neglect, that necessary departure of the
other avoyding the eminent danger, hee himselfe in that playeth the deserter.

Thus adultery is seen as the primary Scriptural grounds for divorce; however, prolonged
willful desertion is also see nasa scriptural occasion for dissolution of a marriage, and
in the case of necessary separation because of physical danger the spouse guilty of
cruelty is regarded as the deserter.

Ames's teacher, William Perkins (1558-1602), can likewise be understood as
ambivalent on this question. On the one hand, in an exposition of Christ's Sermon on
the Mount, Perkins comments on 1 Corinthians 7:15:

The malicious or wilful departing of the unbeliever, doth dissolve the marriage;
but that is no cause of having a bill of divorce: only adultery causeth that. Here
the believer is a mere patient, and the divorce is made by the unbeliever, who
unjustly forsaketh, and so puts away the other. (Works, 1612-13, HI, 69)

He here disallows divorce for physical abuse:

5. Object. But maried persons may seek to spill the blood one of another, and
therefore it is good to give a bil of divorce, to prevent that evill. Answer. Such
en mi tie may cause a separation fora time, till reconciliation be made, but the bond
of mariage must not therefore be broken. (Ibid.)

Commenting on 1 Corinthians 7:10, 11, he adds:

Here (say they) is a plaine place against mariage after divorcement. Answ. The
Apostle speaketh of departure, and putting away, for other causes than adulterie; as
for hatred, dislike, &c. which indeede are no sufficient causes of divorce, and
therefore they that separate thereupon, ought not to marrie. (Ibid., Ill, 70-71)

On the other hand, in his Christian Oeconomie Perkins appears to validate a
dissolution of a marriage on the basis of desertion caused by physical cruelty. In the
case of a mixed marriage:

Suppose that an husband which is an unbeliever or a heretic in the foundation, of
his own accord, upon detestation of true religion, quite forsakes the believing wife,
and denies any more to dwell with her: what is to be done?

All good means must be used to bring the infected party to repentance; and when
none will succeed, but the case remaineth desperate, then marriage is dissolved on
his part, and the believing wife is free to marry another. (Works, III, 687)

<a id="ga20-p609"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=611 printed_page=609 -->

In the case of two believers:

The faulty person, who is the cause of this desertion, is to be forced by course of
civil, and ecclesiastical censure to perform his, or her duty. Upon which
proceeding if he remain obstinate and perverse in will; the other must in patience,
and earnest prayer unto God, wait the time, until his mind may be changed, and he
be made to relent by the order of the Magistrate. But if one of them, by just
occasion of fear, be compelled to depart from the other: and cannot return again
without apparent danger of life; in this case they are not bound to return; but the
delinquent party is to remain solitary, till they be instructed and made willing to do
their duties: and in the mean while, the party innocent must be resolved that God
hath call him or her to a single life.

Again, be it that the one is resolutely unwilling to dwell with the other, and
thereupon flies away without any fault of the other: if the thing after a long space
be sufficiently known beforehand, and all probable means have been used, to
reclaim the guilty person; yea, being called he doth not personally appear before
the judge, to yield a reason of the fact; after public and solemn declarations made,
the Minister upon such desertion may pronounce the marriage to be dissolved. For
he that upon malice flieth away from his mate, is to be holden in the same terms as
with an unbeliever, who departs upon detestation of religion, and the service of
God, I Tim. 5.8. {Ibid., Ill, 687-688).

Perkins goes on to discuss "malicious and spiteful dealing of married folks one with the
other":

Malicious dealing is, when dwelling together, they require each of other
intollerable conditions; and when the one doth not regard nor relieve the other,
being in danger or extremity a sit is meet. For this is as much as to betray one
another's estate and life to their utter enemies. Here it may be demanded, what a
believer should do, who is in certain and imminent danger, either of loss of life, or
breach of conscience, if they both abide together.

... If [this danger is] from a stranger, then the husband either takes upon him the
defence of his believing wife, or not; if he doth, then she ought to abide with him.
If not, she may depart and provide for her own safety. Again, if the husband
threateneth hurt, the believing wife may flie in this case; and it is all one, as if the
unbelieving man should depart. For to depart from one, and drive one away by
threats, are equipollent. {Ibid., Ill, 688)

Historical Comc*t.

Resolution of the seeming ambiguities in the resources most likely relied upon
by the Westminster divines is helped by an understanding of the historical context. In
the medieval Roman Catholic church "'divorce' was understood to be the separation of
the adulterous spouse from the bed and table of the innocent spouse, not a definitive
dissolution of their marriage bond and the right of each to remarry" (Steven Ozment,

<a id="ga20-p610"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=612 printed_page=610 -->

When Fathers Ruled: Family Life in Reformation Europe, Harvard U. Press, 1983, p.
80). Although annulments could be obtained, sometimes after years of marriage
producing several children, the difficulties surrounding divorce and the prevention of
marriages between parties deemed of too close a relationship (even descendants of
godparents) caused a host of problems in the area of sexual immorality. The Protestant
reformers, in addition to doing away with the exaltation of celibacy, and with the
concept of marriage as a sacrament, contributed to a healthier state of marriage and
family life by seeking to restore a biblical understanding of marriage and divorce. In
Zwingli's Switzerland the pendulum swung far in an opposite direction from the Roman
Catholic practices: "The Zurich court recognized six basic grounds for divorce —
adultery, impotence, willful desertion, grave incompatibility, sexually incapacitating
illness, and deception. The court in Basel recognized adultery, impotence, willful
desertion, capital crimes, leprosy, and a serious threat to life" (Ozment, p. 93).

The Zurich court refused to grant divorce for what it interpreted to be bearable,
transient incompatibility. ... However, the court did recognize three instances of
grave, life-threatening incompatibility that justified separation and divorce. These
were if a husband beat a wife to the point of endangering her life; if proven
impotentia superveniens resulted from physical injuries inflicted by marital
fighting; and if an older spouse became ill and his or her mate refused to provide
the necessary care because of enmity between them.

The Basel court was even more reluctant to grant a full divorce for alleged threats
to life ..., although it recognized such threats as a legitimate ground. It preferred to
dismiss hateful spouses and wife-beaters with warnings. Men who persisted in
beating their wives eventually received short prison sentences to encourage them
to reform, and recurrent hostility between spouses did bring about separation from
bed and table and a division of property, but these solutions still fell short of
divorce. Even in cases of "furious and insane" threats to life, the Basel court
would tell the couple to separate for a time before granting an actual divorce,
clinging as long as possible to the slimmest hope of reconciliation. (Ozment, p. 96)

The church in Geneva was more cautious. Calvin held strictly to the divorce
text in Matthew and would not allow divorce on account of leprosy or impotence. He
did allow for divorce for desertion in certain circumstances, sometimes with the
implication that adultery would be involved:

With respect to Calvin's divorce doctrine, then, we may choose between thinking
of it as allowing a single ground for the dissolution of marriage (that is, adultery,
with desertion constituting an offense giving rise to a presumption of adultery) or
the same two principal grounds as Luther: adultery and desertion. Calvin
excluded other grounds not only as justifying divorce but even as justifying de
facto separation. In his letters to noblewomen, Calvin insisted that even if'a
Protestant wife were cruelly beaten by her Catholic husband, she should not leave
him unless she were convinced that her life was actually in danger. (Roderick
Phillips, Putting Asunder, p. 55. an example of such correspondence is to be
found in the register of the company of pastors of geneva in the time of Calvin,
ed. and trans. Philip E. Hughes, 1966, pp. 193-198.)

<a id="ga20-p611"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=613 printed_page=611 -->

Theodore Beza, whose Tractatio De Repudiis et Divortiis (1573, 1591) would have an
influence upon English Puritan thinking, continued Calvin's position. The Consistory
of Geneva resorted to excommunication far more often than to divorce in cases of
marital quarrels and disputes. In the period from 1564 to 1569 there were 302
Genevans excommunicated for domestic quarrels (15.8% of the total excommunicated;
sixty-one husbands and two wives excommunicated for mauvais menage were accused
of beating their spouses), whereas divorces probably averaged no more than one per
year. (Phillips, Putting Asunder, p. 58; E. William Monter, "The Consistory of Geneva,
1559-1569" in Peter DeKlerk, ed., Renaissance, Reformation, Resurgence, 1976, pp.
72-73).

The Situation in England.

In England the foundation of the state-established Reformation lay in a divorce,
or more technically an annulment, - that of King Henry VIII from Catherine of Aragon.
Yet, somewhat ironically, the English Reformed church remained the most conservative
of all the Protestant churches on the issue of divorce, no legislation on divorce being
passed in England until the mid-19th century (Phillips, Putting Asunder, p. 77). Martin
Bucer, who came from Strassburg to England in 1549, dedicated to King Edward VI his
DE Regno Christi, substantial portions of which dealt with the subject of marriage.
John Milton in the period of the Puritan Rebellion translated these portions as part of his
argument for divorce for incompatibility. Bucer was probably the most liberal of the
Protestant Reformers in this regard although his views did not go quite so far as
Milton's (Phillips, Putting Asunder, pp. 123-125; cf. pp. 69-71).

Beginning in 1543 there was an effort to revise English canon law. In the 1550s
a commission, apparently influenced mainly by Archbishop Thomas Cranmer and Peter
Martyr, produced the desired Reformatio Legum Ecclesiasticarum. The death of
Edward VI and the subsequent reaction of Mary Tudor, along with the later disapproval
of Elizabeth I and her Parliaments, prevented this revision of church law from ever
being adopted, but it reflects the thought of leading English reformers of the time:

It specified that when one spouse was guilty of adultery the innocent party should
be allowed to divorce and remarry, but only after a six-month period had elapsed
so as to give the couple an opportunity for reconciliation. The adulterous spouse
would not be permitted to remarry. Divorce would also be justified for reason of
desertion or absence without news, with the qualification that the deserted partner
could not remarry for two or three years. If a remarriage did take place but the
absent spouse subsequently returned, then the first (dissolved) marriage was to
take precedence and the second would be declared null. It is not clear whether this
provision would operate in all cases, for the Reformatio Legum also prescribed life
imprisonment for desertion and for prolonged absences that could not be
satisfactorily explained.

These grounds for divorce —adultery and desertion —were a Protestant orthodoxy,
as we have seen, so it is interesting to note that the Reformatio Legum went even
further and permitted divorce where one spouse was the victim of deadly hostility

<a id="ga20-p612"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=614 printed_page=612 -->

or violent treatment on the part of the other. "Deadly hostility" referred to attempted murder: "If deadly hostility should arise between husband and wife, and become inflamed to such an intensity that one attack the other, either by treacherous means or by poison, and should wish to take his life in some way, either by open violence or by hidden malice, we ordain that, as soon as so horrible a crime can be proved, such persons should be by law separated by divorce in the courts." As for ill-treatment, the Reformatio Legum specified that "should a man be violent to his wife and display excessive harshness of word and deed in dealing towards her," he should be admonished and cautioned to "treat her as the intimate union of marriage requires." If the husband failed to improve his behavior, the wife should be able to obtain a divorce. This revision did not abrogate the legal authority vested in husbands to administer "moderate correction" to their wives who were "rebellious, obstinate, petulant, scolds and of evil behaviour" (Phillips, Putting Asunder, pp. 83-84).

These proposals, though supported by such as John Foxe, did not meet with official approval in Elizabeth's reign (1558-1603). The views of Zurich, however, were entertained when Heinrich Bullinger's Decades were given official endorsement for ministerial training in 1587. Concerning divorce Bullinger wrote:

Divorcements and separations were permitted by the law in the twenty-fourth of Deuteronomy, for nothing else but for the hardness of the Jewish people's hearts, and for the avoiding of some greater inconvenience; to wit, lest peradventure any man should poison, strangle, or otherwise kill the woman, his wife, which he hated, when he could by none other means rid his hands of her. And they that were in that manner divorced might at their pleasures be married to others (3rd Decade, Sermon VII, Parker Society edition, II, 228).

But if for adultery, or some other matter more heinous than that, necessity forceth to break wedlock, yet in this case the church will do nothing unadvisedly. For she hath her judges who will judge in matters and causes of matrimony according to right and equity, or rather according to God's laws and the rule of honesty (5th Decade, Sermon X, Parker Society, IV, 511).

For the laws of God and men admit a divorcement betwixt a man and his adulterous wife. And yet let not any less or lighter cause dissolve this knot betwixt man and wife, than fornication is. Otherwise God, which in the gospel hath permitted the less, doth not forbid the greater, to be causes of divorcement (2nd Decade, Sermon X, Parker Society, I, 403).

Bullinger's The Christian State of Matrimonye had been translated into English by Miles Coverdale earlier, in 1541, and said:

Fifthly: What the right occasion of divorce is hath Christ mentioned in the gospel and named whoredom or adultery. With the which no doubt, he hath not excepted like and greater occasions, but understood and comprehended them therein. For the holy Apostle also did leave infidelity as an occasion of divorce. 1 Cor. vii. Manifest it is also, that wedlock was partly instituted for the eschewing of adultery.

<a id="ga20-p613"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=615 printed_page=613 -->

Wherefore when the guilty party is divorced, the unguilty is at liberty to marry
again, if he or she cannot live sole, according to Paul, if thou cannest not be chaste,
marry, for better it is to marry than to bum in concupiscence (leaf lxxvii).

Moreover the faithful and virtuous Emperors, holy Constantine, Theodosius,
Valentinus, Anastasius and Justinian decreed other things also to be lawful
occasions of divorce as murder, poisoning, and such like as it is evident in Cod.
Lib. v. Tit. xvii De repudiis. Every reasonable man then consider, that God did
ordain wedlock for the honesty and wealth of man, and not for his shame and
destruction. They therefore that in no case will help the oppressed person, nor in
any wise permit divorce to be made, do even as the Pharisees, which by reason of
the commandment of the Sabbath after the letter, suffered men to be destroyed and
perish (facing leaf lxxviii).

Bullinger thus saw adultery as inclusive of other violations of the marriage bond which
were either equal or greater and hence sufficient basis for divorce. The revised English
church law of 1604, however, while allowing separation from bed and board, prohibited
divorce entirely (Phillips, Putting Asunder, p. 107).

In the early 17th century there are a few other clues to Puritan thought on
divorce leading up to the time of the Westminster Assembly. In addition to Perkins and
Ames, already discussed, William Whately (1583-1639) published two works on
marriage. In A Bride-Bush, or a Wedding Sermon: Compendiously describing the
duties of married Persons: By performing whereof, Marriage shall be to them a great
Helpe, which now finde it a little Hell (London, 1617), he commented on 1 Corinthias
7:15:

In which words, he permits not to the unbeleever such separations as lawfull, but
casts the fault upon him alone, and after frees the other party from the band by
which he or shee was formerly tied: as if hee had saide; if he will need es be gone,
let him; and trouble not your selves about it, the sin lyes wholly upon his owne
soule. A Christian man or woman, when cases of this nature fall out, is no longer
tied to the former covenant, nor to the former partie, which hath himselfe first
broken it. Neither is this any whit contrary to that of our Saviour, who forbids a
man to put away his wife & marry another, unlesse it be for adultery. For we
allow not to him or her, any such liberty of putting away, but upon that only cause.
Yet if he or she be wrongfully put away (the yoke-fellow withdrawing him or
herselfe out of the way, so that there be no hope to recall them, or else not
returning upon good persuasion or meanes used) we yeelde with the Apostle, a
ffeedome to the party so wronged. And these things you see may well stand
together. No man may lawfully forsake his wife, nor the wife the husband (but in
case of adultery) to marry another; and yet any man or woman, being wrongfully
forsaken by his or her yoke-fellow, may lawfully then marry another, as being
disburdened of the former yoke, without any sinne, on their parts, in that thing,
procuring it. Onely we professe, that in cases of this nature, a just and orderly
course must bee taken (pp. 4-5).

<a id="ga20-p614"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=616 printed_page=614 -->

Whately's Bride-Bush was reprinted in 1619, and he was subsequently summoned to
appear before the Court of High Commission to explain himself. He retracted his
position on divorce in 1621, and when a second edition of a Bride-Bush was published
in 1623, he admitted the error of his divorce doctrine, but primarily acknowledged that
an adulterous partner could be received back and hence adultery did not automatically
dissolve a marriage. In his other work on marriage, A Care-Cloth: ora treatise of the
c umber sand troubles of marriage: Intended to advise them that may, to shun them;
that may not, well and patiently to bear them (London, 1624), is mainly a warning
against the difficulties of marriage, perhaps because the strictness of English divorce
law constrained Whately to counsel in this direction (cf. Phillips, Putting Asunder, pp.
112-115).

Among the Westminster divines themselves at least two had published works on
marriage, Thomas Gataker (1574-1654) and William Gouge (1575-1653). Gataker's
works, being wedding sermons, do not shed direct light on the question of divorce
(Marriage Duties Briefly Couched Together; out of colossians 3.18,19 [London, 1620]
and A Wife in Deed. a sermon concerning the matter of marriage [London, 1624]).
Gouge, however, does take an explicit position on divorce in his of domestic all Duties,
published in 1622 with second and third editions in 1626 and 1634:

Concerning adultery, we deny not, but that it giveth just cause of divorce: but
withall we say (as we have good warrant from Christ's words) that it is the only
cause of just divorce (3rd ed., 1634, II, ii, 16).

Gouge does also discuss desertion:

The vice contrary to matrimonial unity is desertion, when one of the married
couple through indignation of the true religion, and utter detestation thereof, or
some other like cause, shall apparently renounce all matrimonial unity, and
withdraw him or her self from all society with the other, and live among infidels,
idolaters, heretics, or other such persecutors, as a faithful Christian with safety of
life, or a good conscience, cannot abide among, and though all good means that
can be thought of be used to reclaim the party so departed, yet nothing will prevail,
but obstinately persisteth in renouncing all matrimonial fellowship (II, ii 3).

Referring to 1 Corinthians 7:15, Gouge says:

That desertion therefore on the delinquent's part is such a dissolution of marriage,
as ffeeth the innocent party from the bondage thereof. By bondage he meaneth
matrimonial subjection (by reason whereof neither of the married persons have
power of their own body, but one of the others) (II, ii, 3).

Gouge does not see desertion as a total dissolution of the marriage such that the
innocent party is free to remarry. He distances himself from Reformed churches like
those of Zurich in this regard:

In many reformed Churches beyond the seas desertion is accounted so far to
dissolve the very bond of marriage, as liberty is given to the party forsaken to

<a id="ga20-p615"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=617 printed_page=615 -->

marry another; and it is also applied to other cases than that which is above
mentioned: as when an infidel, idolater, or heretic shall depart from one of the true
religion for other causes than hatred of religion: or when both man and wife
having lived as idolaters among idolaters, one of them being converted to the true
faith, leaveth his abode among idolaters, and goeth to the professors of the true
faith, but can by no means get the other party to remove: or where one of the true
religion shall depart from another of the same profession, and will by no means be
brought to live with the party so left, but openly manifesteth peremptory obstancy;
the matter being heard and adjudged by the magistrate, the marriage bond may be
broken; and liberty given to the party forsaken to marry another. But because our
church hath no such customs, nor our law determined such cases, I leave them to
the custom of other churches (II, ii 3).

Gouge was a highly respected and very active member of the Westminster
Assembly, sometimes filling the moderator's chair in his absence. "For many years he
was esteemed the father of the London ministers" (Daniel Neal, the history of the
Puritans, London, 1837, n , 611). Since he served as chairman of the subcommittee on
divorce (Alexander F. Mitchell and John Struthers, minutes of the sessions of the
westminster assembly of divines while engaged in preparing their directory for
Church Government, confession of Faith, and Catechisms [November 1644 to March
1649, Edinburgh and London, 1874, p. 266; cf. pp. lxxxvii, 91 and 190), it appears
remarkable that the Assembly came to adopt its position concerning desertion as a
grounds for divorce. Dr. David Jones comments, "One could wish that Gouge had
published a post-Assembly volume on How My Mind Has Changed" ("The Westminster
Confession on Divorce and Remarriage," Presbyterion XVI, 26). As Dr. Jones
surmises, this was very likely because of the influence of the delegates from Scotland,
where since 1573 divorce had been allowed by law for willful desertion for four years
or more as well as for adultery:

The deserted spouse had to raise an action of adherence (a demand that the deserter
return) as early as a year after the actual desertion, and the guilty spouse was
warned by the court and the church to return. if he or she refused to return, the
deserting spouse was denounced and excommunicated and if he or she had not
returned at the end of four years' absence, the abandoned spouse was permitted to
apply to the Commissary court for a divorce (Phillips, Putting Asunder, p. 61).

Even with the Scottish influence, therefore, the English Puritan position on divorce
would be relatively cautious and conservative, more like that of Geneva than that of
Zurich.

The comparatively conservative stance of the Westminster divines in the context
of debate over divorce in their time is reflected also in another key member of the
Assembly, Herbert Palmer. When the English Civil War was beginning, royalists
argued for loyalty to the King on the basis of analogy between the people's relation to
their monarch and a marriage which could not be dissolved. Palmer, as a good Puritan,
sought to defend Parliament's action short of making it like a divorce:

<a id="ga20-p616"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=618 printed_page=616 -->

A wife is tyed to her Husband by the Covenant of God (so called, Prov. 2.) and by
the Ordinance of God more ancient, and no lesse strong than that of Politick
Government. She cannot recall wholly her Husbands Authority over her .... Yet
for her necessity, she may by the Law of God and conscience ... secure her Person
from his violence by absence (though that ordinarily be against the Law of
Marriage, and the end of it) or any other means of necessary defence (Scripture
and Reason Pleaded for Defensive Armes, London, 1643, pp. 35-36, quoted in
Phillips, Putting Asunder, p. 118).

On the other hand, when Milton was republishing Martin Bucer to support his broader
approach to divorce, Palmer responded with a sermon before Parliament and the
Assembly which Sottish commissioner Robert Baillie called one "of the most Scottish
and free sermons that ever I heard any where" (Baillie, Letters and Journals,
Edinburgh, 1841, II, 220). Arguing against toleration, Palmer cites Milton's writing on
divorce as one example of pernicious opinions that are abroad:

If any plead Conscience ... for divorce for other causes then Christ and His
Apostles mention; Of which a wicked booke is abroad and uncensured, though
deserving to be burnt, whose Author, hath been so impudent as to set his Name to
it, and dedicate it to vour selves ... will you grant a Toleration for all Ibis? (The
glass e of God's Providence Towards His Faithfull Ones, 1644, p. 54; quoted in
Ernest Sirluck, "Introduction," complete prose works of john Milton, New Haven:
Yale U. Press, 1959, II, 103).

A further bit of evidence for the Westminster divines' understanding of ground
for divorce is to be found in the Westminster Assembly Annotations upon all the books
of the old and new testament (1st ed. 1645, 2nd ed. 1651, 3rd ed. 1657), a work done
under the auspices of the Assembly but without its official approval (cf. Mitchell and
Struthers, minutes of the westminster Assembly, p. 132 for an instance of apparent
disapproval of a portion). In the Westminster Annotations, produced in large part by
members of the Assembly, including Gataker and Gouge, comments on such passages
as Mark 10:5 (in the 3rd edition), Malachi 2:16 (3rd ed.), and Deuteronomy 24:1 (1st
ed.) reveal a tendency to uphold the ideal of no divorce while recognizing the necessity
of the civil magistrate's dealing with the reality of human hardness of heart:

For Moses commanded not dismission of the wife; but (as a civil Magistrate)
permitted it, to avoid murder and cruelty ... (on Mark 10:5).

And thus divorce was, if not permitted, yet not punished under the Law: As the
Magistrate sometimes suffers what he allows and approves not (on Mai. 2:16).
Hereby God approveth not the ficklenesse of men's affections, in a light, or
causelesse leaving of their wives, Mai. 2.16. but permitteth a parting, for
preventing of danger through dislike, Matthew 19.6,7, 8,9 (on Deut. 24:1).

One further reflection of the thinking of the Westminster divines can be seen in
A Christian Directory, by Richard Baxter (1615-91), which was written in 1664 and
1665, almost twenty years after the Westminster Confession was produced. In Part n,

<a id="ga20-p617"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=619 printed_page=617 -->

Chapter IX of his Christian Economics, (or Family Duties) Baxter answers several
questions relating to desertion:

Quest. XV. Doth not the desertion of one party disoblige the other?
Answ. ... It is sometimes easy, and sometimes hard to discern which is the
deserting party. If the wife go away from the husband unwarrantably, though she
require him to follow her, and say that she doth not desert him, yet it may be taken for a
desertion, because it is the man who is to rule and choose the habitation. But if the man
go away, and the woman refuse to follow him, it is not he that is therefore the deserter
(Practical Works, London, 1838,1,445).

Quest. XVI. What if a man or wife know that the other in hatred doth really
intend by poison, or other murder to take away their life? May they not depart?

Answ. They may not do it upon a groundless or rash surmise; nor upon a danger
which by other lawful means may be avoided (as by vigilancy, or the magistrate, or
especially by love or duty). But in plain danger, which is not otherwise like to be
avoided, I doubt not, but it may be done, and ought. For it is a duty to preserve our own
lives as well as our neighbours). And when marriage is contracted for mutual help, it is
naturally implied, that they shall have no power to deprive one another of life (however
some barbarous nations have given men power of the lives of their wives). And killing
is the grossest kind of desertion, and a greater injury and violation of the marriage
covenant than adultery; and may be prevented by avoiding the murderer's presence, if
that way be necessary. None of the ends of marriage can be attained, where the hatred
is so great.

Quest. XVII. If there be but a fixed hatred of each other, is it inconsistent with
the ends of marriage? And is parting lawful in such a case?

Answ. The injuring party is bound to love, and not to separate; and can have no
liberty by his or her sin. ... But the innocent party's case is harder (though commonly
both parties are faulty, and therefore both are obliged to return to love, and not to
separate). But if hatred proceed not to adultery, or murder, or intolerable injuries, you
must remember that marriage is not a contract for years, but for life, and that it is
possible that hatred may be cured (how unlikely soever it may be). And therefore you
must do your duty, and wait, and pray, and strive by love and goodness to recover love,
and then stay to see what God will do; for mistakes in your choice will not warrant a
separation.

Quest. XVIII. what if a woman have a husband that will not suffer her to read
the Scriptures, nor go to God's worship public or private, or that so beateth or abuseth
her, as that it cannot be expected that human nature should be in such a case kept fit for
any holy action, or if a man have a wife that will scold at him when he is praying or
instructing his family, and make it impossible to him to serve God with freedom, or
peace and comfort.

Answ. The woman must (at necessary seasons, though not when she would)
both read the Scriptures, and worship God, and suffer patiently what is inflicted on her.

<a id="ga20-p618"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=620 printed_page=618 -->

Martyrdom may be as comfortably suffered from a husband, as from a prince. But yet
if neither her own love, and duty, and patience, nor friends' persuasion, nor the
magistrate's justice, can free her from such inhuman cruelty, as quite disableth her for
her duty to God and man, i see not buts he may depart from such a tyrant. But the man
hath more means to restrain his wife from beating him, or doing such intolerable things;
either by the magistrate, or by denying her what else she might have, or by his own
violent restraining her, as belong e th to a conjugal ruler, and as circumstances shall
direct a prudent man. But yet in case that unsuitableness or sin be so great, that after
long trial there is no likelihood of any other cohabitation, but what will tend to their
spiritual hurt and calamity, it is their lesser sin to live asunder by mutual consent (I,
446).

Baxter also has remarks concerning wife-beating:

Divines used to say, that it is unlawful for a man to beat his wife: but the reason is not,
that he wanteth authority to do it; but, 1. Because he is by his relation obliged to a life
of love with her; and therefore must so rule, as tendeth not to destroy love: and, 2 .
Because it may often do otherwise more hurt to herself and the family, than good. It
may make her furious and desperate, and make her contemptible in the family, and
diminish the reverence of inferiors, both to wife and husband, for living so uncomely a
life (1,447).

Baxter's counsel in this regard is similar to that of William Ames prior to the
Westminster Assembly:

Quest. 5. Whether or no, and how farre it is lawfull for a Man to reprove his
Wife being faulty.

14. A- Hee may and ought to restraine her by such meanes as are not repugnant
to conjugall society, as by admonitions, reprehensions, and the deniall of some
priviledges which are due to a godly and obedient Wife. But it is by no meanes the part
of any Husband, io correct his Wife with blowes:

Because first, It proceedeth from an unwarranted bitternesse and cruelty.

Secondly, it is repugnant to the ingenuous, quiet and peaceable society of
Wedlock.

Thirdly, It destroyeth conjugall affection, as well in the Husband, while hee
useth his Wife as his Servant, as in the Wife while shee seeth herselfe contemned and
tyrannically dealt with.

Fourthly, Experience teacheth, that this is not the way, either to the amending of
the Wife, or the peace of the Family.

Fifthly, It is not allowed by any law, nor practised by any, but furious or
drunken men (Ames, Conscience and the Cases Thereof, Book V, Chapter XXXVII, pp.
207, 208).

<a id="ga20-p619"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=621 printed_page=619 -->

William Perkins had earlier taken a similar position:

Here question is mooved, whether the husband may correct the wife?

Answ. Though the husband be the wives head, yet it seemeth he hath no power
nor libertie granted him in this regard. For we read not in the Scriptures, any precept or
example to warrant such practise of his authoritie. He may reprove and admonish her in
a word onely, if he see th her ina fault. For, thus we read, that Iacob censured his wife,
beeing impatient, even in anger. Gen 30.2 ... And lob reprooved his wife, lob 2:10 ...
But he may not chastise her either with stripes, or stroakes. The reason is plaine.
Wives are their husbands mates; and they two be one flesh. And no man will hate,
much lesse beat his owne flesh, but nourisheth and cherisheth it, Eph. 5.29 .. Againe, it
is the commandement of God, that man should not trespasse against the wife of his
youth, Malac. 2.15 ....

Neverthelesse; if she growe to extremities, and be desperately perverse, so as
there be no hope of amendement: then the Magistrate may be informed; who to prevent
scandals, and to provide for publicke peace, both ought and may assigne unto her
necessarie correction, and punishment according to her desert. Now the husband that
hath a wife so stubbome and peevish, must beare it, if it may be borne, as the portion of
his crosse laid upon him by God. And in this case if he bee impatient, he may in some
sort be pardoned and pitied, but he is not wholy to be excused (Perkins, Christian
Oeconomie, in Works, III, 691, 692).

The Puritan attitude of Perkins, Ames, and Baxter must be understood in the
context of their times:

Wife beating, which was doubtless the most widespread form of marital ill-
treatment, was rarely condemned, either explicitly or implicitly. Even the
Reformatio Legum Ecclesiasticarum was careful to specify that the ability of
women to divorce would not imply a reduction of men's power of "moderate
correction" over their wives. Such neglect of cruelty as a matrimonial offense was
quite consistent with the prevailing social attitudes toward the relationship of
husband and wife, which specified the latter's inferiority and her duty of obedience
(Phillips, Putting Asunder, p. 89).

As another scholar has commented: "Much more than the Anglicans, the Puritans
developed marriage as a partnership and simultaneously made the strongest objections
to wife-beating" (Richard L. Greaves, Society and Religion in Elizabethan England,
Minneapolis: U. of Minnesota Press, 1981, p. 739).

Conclusions.

The Puritan movement, with the Westminster Assembly coming at its
culmination, manifested both a masterful knowledge of scriptural teaching and also a
pastoral sensitivity to the needs and tendencies of the human soul. This combination is
apparent in the materials that would have been available to the Westminster divines as

<a id="ga20-p620"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=622 printed_page=620 -->

they dealt with the subject of divorce and whether physical abuse could be regarded as a
grounds for dissolution of a marriage.

1. to a direct question of whether physical abuse could be a grounds for
divorce, the Puritan tradition informing the Westminster Assembly would have
answered, No, not p erse or by itself. William Perkins and William Ames before the
Westminster Assembly, William Gouge as a member of the Assembly, and Richard
Baxter soon after the Assembly are all consistent with Calvin and Beza and the
Genevan tradition in emphasizing adultery as the essential cause for divorce.

2. This same Puritan tradition also saw that under certain circumstances
desertion could be a grounds for divorce, and physical abuse could be the basis of a
desertion, the spouse guilty of the abuse being reputed as the deserter even though the
other one may have departed. before such a situation could bethe grounds fora
divorce, however, a sufficient time would have to expire for the efforts of both church
and civil magistrate to seek to achieve a reconciliation.

What do such findings indicate for our contemporary setting? First of all, in the
Reformation era settings of Geneva, Scotland, and England the civil magistrate could be
expected, to a greater degree than in late-20th-century America, to be mindful of and
respectful toward Scriptural principles. With regard to a matter like divorce, while we
must be respectful toward the secular courts, we cannot rely on contemporary judicial
principles to determine what is right.

Secondly, this means that we must rely even more than did the Reformation era
on the constructive discipline of the church. When physical abuse is occurring in a
marriage, the church must deal with a situation which, as the Puritans saw, is contrary
to God's purpose for marriage. A temporary separation may be necessary for safety,
which the church may need to facilitate, and the abusing partner should be disciplined,
with helpful counsel but eventually to the point of excommunication if there is not
repentance in deed as well as in word. The situation is complicated in our cultural
setting when the marriage partner is not a member of a church, or is a member of some
other church; nevertheless, discipline must be attempted. Only after a suitable length of
time and a sufficient process of church discipline should a divorce be granted for such a
desertion of one's marriage partner and the marriage covenant. (This is essentially the
conclusion reached by David D. Prescott in The Problem of Wife Abuse: Wife Abuse
and Pastoral Counseling, Westminster Theological Seminary D.Min. project, 1991; cf.
pp. 212-221 on "Divorce: Is It a Possibility?")

In its understanding of the Bible's teaching on divorce as "nothing but adultery,
or such willful desertion as can no way be remedied by the Church or civil magistrate,
is cause sufficient of dissolving the bond of marriage," the Westminster Assembly was
seeking to steer the Scriptural path between two demonstrable extremes and in the
process uphold God's high ideal for marriage. On the one hand, this ruled out the
Roman Catholic concept of no divorce, allowing divorce for adultery and under certain
circumstances desertion. On the other hand, it ruled out divorce for incompatibility as
some such as Milton were advocating. Physical abuse of a spouse was seen as contrary
to the biblical purpose for marriage and would thus be grounds for church discipline

<a id="ga20-p621"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=623 printed_page=621 -->

and could, if it led to prolonged separation without remedy, become a cause for
dissolution of a marriage. Such circumstantial details can be handled only by a body of
elders cognizant of and close to the situation. Whereas proven adultery would be
readily acknowledged as grounds for a divorce, desertion on the basis of physical abuse
as a cause for dissolution of a marriage should be determined from the circumstances by
the local session or in the case of a minister by the presbytery.

TE David Brewer
TE William S. Barker, Chairman

<a id="ga20-p622"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=624 printed_page=622 -->

APPENDIX II

DIVORCE RECONSIDERED

by RE David C. Lachman

The Ad Interim Committee on Marriage, Divorce, and Remarriage is submitting
a lengthy report to the Nineteenth General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America. The committee was requested to "ask whether the Westminster Confession
Chapter 24.6 is more lax or more restrictive than Scripture” and to "suggest any
revisions to that article of the Confession it deems appropriate," particularly addressing
the question "whether a Christian may have other legitimate grounds for divorce,
besides desertion by an unbelieving spouse, or adultery (for example, inveterate
physical abuse, marital rape or other sexual abuse, attempted murder, or equally serious
violations of the marriage covenant)." It was also asked to "Recommend guidelines and
resources for pastoral care and counsel of couples with marital difficulties,..." [etc.]
The committee's proposed report considers the Confession historically, discusses
Scriptural perspectives and suggests guidelines and resources for pastoral care and
counsel.

Taken as a whole, the report can be characterized as a significant departure from
previous Reformed teaching, both in suggesting that "wilful desertion in the
Westminster Confession can be more broadly interpreted than has previously been
believed (p. 2319) and in maintaining that, in Scripture, abandonment by an unbeliever
can mean more than simple physical departure, (pp. 2345-6) It even maintains "that the
believing spouse may initiate legal action to make her biblical divorce legal in the eyes
of the state," explaining that an abuser can be held to have deserted the spouse, declared
an unbeliever and then treated accordingly, (pp. 2381-1) The practical section of the
report reflects this deviation.

It should be clearly understood that this report, for all its language of restraint, is
a substantial departure from what has hitherto been believed to be the Reformed and
Biblical teaching. Historically, opinion has been divided, but between those who
denied the possibility of divorce entirely, those who believed divorce permissible on the
ground of adultery (both with and without the possibility of remarriage), and those who
added desertion to adultery. It is only recently that grounds of divorce have been
substantially expanded, first by liberals and then by various others. Though
conservatively worded, this is the position taken by the Committee's report.

This article will focus on the historical part of the report, both because the
material presented is less familiar and less accessible and an erroneous interpretation
can thus more readily be imposed on even the careful reader and because what is new in
the report is the claim that modern 'Reformed' expansion of Biblical grounds for divorce
has historical Reformed precedent. The Biblical material, with the various arguments
respecting its interpretation, is readily available and does not need to be duplicated here.

<a id="ga20-p623"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=625 printed_page=623 -->

I. Historical

The Committee's report claims that there is no need to revise the Confession,
since the Confession reflects a range of beliefs which would allow the position the
Committee recommends. But its historical paper, though presented with an impressive
scholarly apparatus, completely fails to sustain the position taken.

V. Adultery or fornication committed after a contract, being
detected before marriage, giveth just occasion to the innocent
party to dissolve that contract. In the case of adultery after
marriage, it is lawful for the innocent party to sue out a divorce:
and, after the divorce, to marry another, as if the offending party
were dead.

VI. Although the corruption of man be such as is apt to study
arguments unduly to put asunder those whom God hathjoined
together in marriage: yet nothing but adultery, or such wilful
desertion as can no way be remedied by the Church or civil
magistrate, is cause sufficient of dissolving the bond of marriage:
wherein, a public and orderly course of proceeding is to be
observed; and the persons concerned in it not left to their own
wills and discretion, in their own case. (Westminster Confession of Faith, XXIV, 5 & 6)

according to the Westminster Confession of Faith only "adultery, or such wilful
desertion" as can not be remedied dissolves "the bond of marriage.” Historically, the
WCF has been interpreted as meaning such physical abandonment as removes the
deserting party deserting both from the discipline of the church, which would lead to
repentance and restoration, and from the coercion of the state, with punishment
appropriate to the crime. The assumption has been understood to be that the guilty
party is no longer resident in the bounds of the state and therefore cannot be brought to
justice, either ecclesiastical or civil.

Since a confession consists of necessity of brief, pithy statements, in the absence
of an accompanying commentary or detailed report of any discussion or debate which
led to the final draft of a statement (The minutes of the sessions of the westminster
assembly of Divines, ed. A.F. Mitchell and J. Struthers, Edinburgh, 1874, pp. 279-80 &
299-300 are brief and informative), further inquiry into their meaning must of necessity
resort to contemporary works on the subject. To this end a brief study will be made of
the opinions of several influential English Puritan divines, particularly those writing
prior to the Westminster Assembly. Reference will also be made to the influential
Christian Directory of Richard Baxter, composed not long after the Assembly, and to
Continental Reformed thought as well.

The great sixteenth century Puritan William Perkins has been quoted at length in
the Committee's report, though without drawing any explicit conclusion. It correctly
cites J. I. Packer as judging Perkins "to have permitted divorce and remarriage to the
innocent spouse in the case of desertion and that desertion was understood by him 'to

<a id="ga20-p624"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=626 printed_page=624 -->

cover all behavior that nullified the matrimonial relationship in practice,' such as the
imposition of intolerable conditions." (p. 2313, footnote 24) Packer himself goes so far
as to say that Perkins regarded "desertion, broadly interpreted to cover all behaviour
that nullified the matrimonial relationship in practice —'malicious desertion', when 'they
require of each other intolerable conditions', 'long absence', cruelty, diseased conditions,
and insanity are specified - as ground for the same grant" of divorce. (A Quest for
Godliness, Wheaton, 1990, p. 269; without substantiation he claims the Puritans
followed Perkins in this.) But Packer's claim is without foundation in Perkins. (It is
questionable if he has even bothered to consult Perkins at all. He appears to have read
and followed M. M. Knapper's Tudor Puritanism, Chicago, 1939, uncritically, even to
the point of citing page references in Perkins back to front). For Perkins allows the
dissolution of a marriage contract for such reasons as the discovery of an incurable
disease, such as would be an impediment to performance of marital duties, and in the
case of insanity. But when he passes on from the chapter dealing with 'Of Rejection, or
Refusall of the Contract' to 'Of Marriage', he expressly denies them to be reason for
divorce. (The Workes, Cambridge, 1618, compare pages 682-4 with 687-8).

What, then, did Perkins teach? In addition to divorce for adultery, Perkins
clearly allows the believing wife (or husband) to remarry when the unbelieving or
heretical husband (or wife) forsakes her and will no longer dwell with her, though only
after "all good means" have been used to bring him to repentance. He cites 1 Cor. 7:15
as the basis for teaching that such behavior is that which dissolves a marriage. But
when there is desertion between two believers,

The faulty person, who is the cause of this desertion, is to be forced by
course of Civill, and Ecclesiasticall censure, to performe his, or her duty.
Upon which proceeding, if he remain obstinate, & perverse in will; the
other must in patience, and earnest prayer unto God, wait the time, until
his mind may be changed, and he made to relent by the order of the
Magistrate. But if the one of them, by just occasion of feare, be
compelled to depart from the other: and cannot retume againe without
apparent danger of life; in this case they are not bound to return; but the
delinquent party is to remain solitary, till they be instructed & made
willing to doe their duties: and in the meane while, the party innocent
must be resolved that God hath called him or her to single life.

Againe, be it that the one is resolutely unwilling to dwell with the
other, and thereupon flies away without any fault of the other: if the
thing after a long space be sufficiently knowne before-hand, and all
possible meanes have been used, to reclaime the guilty person; yea being
called, he doth not personally appeare before the Judge, to yeeld a reason
of the fact; after publike and solemne declaration made, the Minister
upon such desertion, may pronounce the marriage to be dissolved. For he
that upon malice flieth away from his mate, is to be holden in the same
tearms with an unbeleever, who departs upon detestation of religion, and
the service of God, I. Tim. 5.8 (pp. 687-8)

<a id="ga20-p625"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=627 printed_page=625 -->

Having considered 'Desertion', Perkins goes on to consider the "malicious and
spitefull dealing of married folkes one with the other."

Malicious dealing is, when dwelling together, they require each of other
intollerable conditions: & when the one doth not regard nor releeve the
other, beeing in danger or extremity, as is meete. For this is as much as
to betray one anothers estate and life to their utter enemies.
Here it may be demaunded, what a beleever should doe, who is in
certaine and imminent danger, either of losse of life, or breach of
conscience, if they both abide together.
Ans. I. This certaine danger hath his originall, either from one that is a
stranger, or from one of the parties: If from a stranger, then the husband
either takes upon him the defence of his beleeving wife, or not; if he
doth, then she ought to abide with him. If not, she may depart and
provide for her own safety. II. Againe, if the husband threateneth hurt,
the beleeving wife may flie in this case; and it is all one, as if the
unbeleeving man should depart. For to depart from one, and drive away
by threats, are equipollent, (p. 688)

That this is the case should not seem strange, for if the believer has a choice of
denying Christ or continuing with the unbelieving partner, separation from the
unbeliever must be the choice. But, in answer to the allegation that this makes the
believing wife to forsake "the unbeleeving husband, which she may not doe," Perkins
answers that "She forsakes him not finally, but leaves him for a time." (p. 688)

This is consonant with what Perkins says in his 'A Godly and Learned
Exposition of Christ's Sermon in the Mount'. In commenting on Matthew 5: 31-2, he
poses the objection based on 1 Corinthians 7: 15,
Here (say they) is another cause of divorce.
Ans. The malitious or wilfull departing of the unbeleever, doth dissolve
the mariage; but that is no cause of giving a bill of divorce: onely
adulterie causeth that. Here the beleever is a meere patient, and the
divorce is made by the unbeleever, who unjustly forsaketh, and so puts
away the other. (Workes, 1618, III, p. 69)

After denying that "a contagious and incurable disease" is grounds for divorce,
he even denies that physical cruelty which goes the length of attempted murder is
sufficient cause for divorce:

Object. But married persons may seeke to spill the blood one of
another, and therefore it is good to give a bil of divorce, to prevent that
evill. Ans. su chen mi tie may cause a separation fora time, til
reconciliation be made, but the bond of mariage must not therefore be
broken, (p. 69)

<a id="ga20-p626"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=628 printed_page=626 -->

He also denies that other similar causes are grounds for divorce. Speaking of 1
Cor. 7:10-1, Perkins comments:

Here (say they) is a plaine place against marriage after
divorcement. Answ. TTte Apostle speaketh of departure, and putting
away, for other causes then adulterie; as for hatred, dislike, &c. which
indeed are no sufficient causes of divorce, and therefore they that
separate thereupon, ought not to marrie. (pp. 70-1)

We may conclude, therefore, that Perkins is consistent both with himself and
with what has hitherto been considered the Reformed teaching. He allows divorce for
adultery and irremediable physical abandonment, but not for any other cause, including
disease, hatred and even attempted murder.

William Ames, a highly esteemed early seventeenth century Puritan, in a
passage not quite clear either in the English translation or the Latin original, seems to
follow Perkins. In addition to adultery, he clearly allows divorce in the case of
desertion:

An obstinate desertion, although in the party deserting, it
containeth no just cause of making a divorce, yet it makes a faire cause
for the party deserted, after the triall of all other meanes in vaine, to
suffer a divorce, 1 Cor. 7:15.

he goes onto say:

The great danger, which one party may bee in by the cruelty of
the other, or by any other manifest meanes of cohabitation, may bee just
cause of retiring for a time, so to provide for his owne safety and
security, but not for an absolute desertion, unlesse first hee bee deserted.
For if one party drive away the other with great fierceness and cruelty,
there is cause of desertion, and hee is to be reputed the deserter. But if
hee obstinately neglect, that necessary departure of the other avoyding
the eminent danger, he himselfe in that playeth the deserter.
(<Conscience with the Power and Cases Thereof, London, 1643, pp. 108-
9)

In the case of physical cruelty, Ames asserts that the deserter is the party driving
the other away. But he does not go on to reflect on this as a cause for divorce and thus
can not be cited in support of making the desertion resulting from physical abuse a
ground of divorce.

William Gouge, the only Westminster divine to publish on the subject, is
particularly important to the purpose at hand, both in that he was a highly respected
member of the Assembly and in that he wrote particularly to the point in question.
Gouge acknowledges adultery as grounds for divorce: "Concerning Adultery, we deny
not, but that it giveth just cause of divorce: but withall we say (as wee have good

<a id="ga20-p627"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=629 printed_page=627 -->

warrant from Christs words) that it is the only cause of just divorce." 'Of Domestic
Duties' in The Workes, London, 1627, pp. 136-7, II, ii, 16)

Gouge speaks at some length about desertion:

The vice contrary to matrimonial unity is Desertion, when one of
the maried couple through indignation of the true religion, and utter
detestation thereof, or some other like cause, shall apparently renounce
all matrimonial unity, & withdraw him or her selfe from all society with
the other, and live among Infidels, Idolaters, heretiques, or other such
persecutors, as a faithfull Christian with safety of life, or a good
conscience, cannot abide among: and though all good meanes that can
be thought of be used to reclaime the party so departed, yet nothing will
prevaile, but obstinatly persisteth in renouncing all matrimoniall
fellowship.

This Desertion is in the case of mariage so capitall, as it ffeeth
the innocent party from any further seeking after the other. ... That
Desertion therefore on the delinquents part is such a dissolution of
mariage, as freeth the innocent party from the bondage thereof. In many
reformed Churches beyond the seas Desertion is accounted so farre to
disolve the very bond of mariage, as liberty is given to the party forsaken
to mary another; and it is also applied to other cases then that which is
above mentioned: as when an Infidel, Idolater, or Heretique shall depart
from one of the true religion for other causes then hatred of religion: or
when both man and wife having lived as Idolaters among Idolaters, one
of them being converted to the true faith, leaveth his abode among
Idolaters, and goeth to the professors of the true faith, but can by no
meanes get the other party to remove: or when one of the true religion
shall depart from another of the same profession, and will by no meanes
bee brought to live with the party so left, but openly manifesteth
peremptory obstinacy, the matter being heard and adjudged by the
magistrate, the mariage-bond may be broken: and liberty given to the
party forsaken to mary another. But because our Church hath no such
custome, nor our law determined such cases, I leave them to the custome
of other Churches. (Ibid., 125-6; II, ii, 3)

While Gouge does not go so far as to adopt the position taken by "many
reformed Churches beyond the seas," neither does he oppose it. Thus, while it may be
true that other commissioners, and perhaps the Scots in particular, influenced the
Assembly to recognize irremediable desertion as a ground for divorce, Gouge did not
necessarily change his mind. Even if he had no private inclination to the position, he
could have been in the minority when the report was drawn up and may well have
acquiesced for the sake of peace. Surely granted the tone of his discussion this would
not have been difficult.

But Gouge is also important in that his position indicates the state of the
question as it was then discussed. It was not a matter of how expansively "desertion"

<a id="ga20-p628"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=630 printed_page=628 -->

should be interpreted, but rather if the person deserted could be considered divorced and thus free to remarry. Gouge was among those inclined, in harmony with English law, to think not.

Two further early seventeenth English divines help to clarify and delineate the state of the discussion at the time of the Westminster Assembly. Andrew Willet, in his massive Synopsis Papismi, that is, A Generall View of Papistrie (5th edition, London, 1634), devotes thirty-five large folio pages to the question of divorce. He recognizes "another cause whereby the marriage knot may bee dissolved, though not for fornication: as when one of the parties doth wilfully renounce, leave and forsake the other person upon no just cause, but either of lightness or for divers religion, as when an Infidell forsaketh a Christian;... Citing the plain words of the Apostle in 1 Cor. 7:15, Willett says that the innocent Christian brother or sister "is freed from the yoke or bond of marriage." (pp. 778-9)

He goes on to describe the desertion "that causeth a dissolution of a marriage" as first being "malitiosa desertio, a malicious departure without any just cause;" second, "the innocent partie must use all meanes to reconcile, reclaim, and bring home againe the wilfull and obstinate partie so departing, if possible;" and third, "if hee continue in his obstinacie, and depart, having no purpose to returne, the matter must be brought before the Judge or Magistrate in such cases: who after publike citation of the obstinate partie, and certaine knowledge that hee refuseth wilfully to appeare being cited, and is not otherwise letted to come, may with mature deliberation pronounce the innocent partie free and at libertie to marrie, according to S. Pauls rule, ..." (p. 779) In the whole of his discussion, Willet does not so much as mention the possibility of physical cruelty as grounds for desertion or divorce.

Another extended discussion of divorce is found in Richard Ward's Theologicall Questions, Dogmaticall Observations, And Evangelicall Essays, Upon...Matthew (London, 1640). Commenting on Matthew 5: 31-2, Ward says that adultery is cause for a "cleane dissolution of marriage by way of divorce:...for that cause our Saviour hath granted liberty, both to dissolve matrimonie, and to marry againe." (pp. 230-1) Of 1 Cor. 7:10-1, in answer to the Roman Catholic objection that "it is not lawful after divorce, to marry so long as both parties live," he says "The Apostle speaks not there of a lawfull departure or separation, to wit, by reason of fornication and adultery (for then he should diametrically have opposed his Master Christ saying here, for adultery there may be a divorce, and departure; Paul there, I command, ne discedat, let not the wife depart from her husband) but of a separation for Religions sake, or for afflictions, or for the cares of those times." (p. 231) In this he does not even appear to recognize a divorce for desertion, much less does he address the issue of physical cruelty.

George Petter in his massive commentary on Mark (A Learned, Pious, and Practical Commentary Upon...Mark. London, 1661) is somewhere between the positions taken by Perkins and Goude. He interprets 1 Cor. 7:15 to mean a "case of malicious and willfull desertion; when one of the married couple, being an unbeliever, that is, a Pagan, or Gentile, and the other a Believer, being after marriage converted to the Christian Religion; the unbeliever doth forsake the believer by departing from him or her, and obstinately refusing to dwell or live with the party forsaken, and that out of a

<a id="ga20-p629"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=631 printed_page=629 -->

hatred of the true Christian Religion: in this case, the Apostle showeth, that the Believer
is not in subjection, but at liberty to marry with another." (pp. 715-6) Beyond this very
narrow ground he says (repeatedly) that "No sin but this of adultery, can, or doth
dissolve the marriage bond." (p. 710)

None of the divines discussed above, from Perkins on, gives the least ground for
thinking that the Westminster Assembly divines intended to include physical cruelty,
whether immediately considered and of itself or secondarily as forcing the other to flee,
as something which would constitute grounds for divorce. None gives any indication
that the temporary separation (which only some spoke of as following such abuse), the
case of religious persecution excepted, could lead to divorce. And most do not even
mention this as a possibility.

Richard Baxter, in his great work on cases of conscience, A Christian Directory:
or, a sum m of practical Theologie, and cases of conscience (2nd edition, London,
1678), is in essential harmony with his predecessors. Fully accepting divorce in the
case of adultery, Baxter considers the question, "Doth not the desertion of one party,
disoblige the other?" He begins his answer by considering which of the two is the
deserting party, it being sometimes hard to discern. He declines absolutely to determine
if a wife should follow her husband from a place where "Gods publick Ordinances" are
rightly administered to go among "ignorant, prophane, heretical persons, or Infidels"
where they are not, there being so many considerations to take into account and the
inconveniences being great whatever way is taken. ('Cases of Divorce", p. 55; II, 9, Q.
15)

He also considers such questions as departure in the cases of attempted murder
and fixed hatred. In the case of "a man or wife know[ing] that the other in hatred doth
really intend by poyson or other murder, to take away their life," he answers that "in
plain danger... it may be done and ought." But in the case of a "fixed hatred" he
concludes that even so wicked a heart as can not be brought to do its duty to love the
other is capable of cure and that "if hatred proceed not to adultery, or murder, or
intolerable injuries, you must remember that Marriage is not a Contract for years but for
life...." He concludes that "therefore you must do your duty, and wait, and pray, and
strive by Love and Goodness to recover Love, and then stay to see what God will do;
For mistakes in your choice [in marriage] will not warrant a separation." (p.56)

He continues:
Quest. 18. what if a woman have a husband that will not suffer her to
read the Scriptures, nor togo to God's Worship publick or private, or
that so beateth or abuseth her, as that it cannot be expected that humane
nature should be in such a case kept fit for any holy action: or if a man
have a Wife that will scold at him when he is praying or instructing his
family, and make it impossible to him to serve God with freedom, or
peace and comfort?

Answ. The Woman must (at necessary seasons, though not when she
would) both read the Scriptures, and Worship God, and suffer patiently
what is inflicted on her: Martyrdome may be as comfortably suffered

<a id="ga20-p630"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=632 printed_page=630 -->

from a Husband, as from a Prince. But yet if neither her own Love, and
duty, and patience, nor friends perswasion, nor the Magistrates justice,
can free her from such inhumane cruelty, as quite disableth her for her
duty to God and man, i see not but that she may depart from such a
Tyrant. But the man hath more means to restrain his Wife from beating
him, or doing such intolerable things: Either by the Magistrate, or by
denying her what else she might have, or by his own violent restraining
her, as belong e th to a conjugal Ruler, and as circumstances shall direct a
prudent man. But yet in case that unsuitableness or sin be so great, that
after long tryal, there is no likelihood of any other co-habitation, but
what will tend to their spiritual hurt and calamity, it is their lesser sin to
live asunder by mutual consent, (p. 56)

He concludes by answering the question, "Who be they that may or may not
marry again when they are parted?," first by allowing those released by adultery to
remarry and then by considering the rest:

The case of all the rest is harder. They that part by consent, to avoid
mutual hurt, may not marry again; Nor the party that departeth for self-
preservation, or for the preservation of estate, or children, or comforts, or
for liberty of Worship, as aforesaid: Because it is but an intermission of
Conjugal fruition, and not a total dissolution of the Relation: And the
innocent party must wait to see whether there be any hope of a return.

he recognizes a difficulty in this: "A short desertion must be endured in hope:
But in the case of a very long, or total desertion or rejection, if the injured party should
have an untameable lust, the case is difficult.... I dare not say that Marriage in that case
is unlawful to the innocent." (p. 56) Baxter does not say to whom he means to apply
this and it is not clear if he intends it liberally of very long and total desertions and
rejections or if he intends it to apply to those he has just said may not marry again. In
any case Baxter is sui generis and ultimately his views can not be taken as
representative of anyone but himself.

The Committee's report makes reference to sixteenth and seventeenth century
Continental Reformed theology. While it is apparent that in the early sixteenth century
both in Zurich and Basel a variety of grounds for divorce were recognized as valid,
including not only adultery and desertion, but disease, life-threatening incompatibility,
impotence, and the like, — and while influential Reformers such as Martin Bucer and
Heinrich Bullinger can readily be quoted to that effect —, there is no evidence that such
views had any lasting influence, particularly in England and Scotland. Although they
represent an attempt to address a real problem, one which needed a solution other than
the recently abandoned Roman Catholic teaching, after mature consideration the
Reformed community as a whole rejected their thinking. It is to Geneva that we should
rather look if we are to seek the historical roots of the views expressed in the
Westminster Confession of Faith. John Calvin's views are well-known and need no
exposition here, allowing only adultery and desertion as grounds of divorce, and
expressly permitting a Protestant wife to flee for safety only if in actual danger of her
life and not simply for cruel beatings. Theodore Beza followed Calvin in this and such

<a id="ga20-p631"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=633 printed_page=631 -->

views, fully compatible with Lutheran doctrine, became normative in Reformed
thought.

In defining desertion as it is ground for divorce, Continental Reformed divines
came to speak of a malitiosa desertio (see Willet's use of the term above), a desertion
which is either a deliberate and permanent removal from the marriage union (such as
the magistrate cannot rectify) or a forced removal caused by such cruelty as puts the
partner's life at hazzard. This was particularly spoken of in the context of the spouse
tenaciously adhering to Romanism; in the case of the husband this often meant physical
prohibition of the wife's exercise of her faith in public or private, such as led to Calvin's
advice mentioned above. In the case of the wife, Roman Catholic persecution being
what it was, it meant a refusal to accompany her husband to a place where he could
worship without fear of the Inquisition. In such cases they believed that the worship of
God took priority over marriage vows and, when there was obstinate continued refusal
by the marriage partner to continue the marital union in circumstances which allowed
the other the exercise of the true religion, they believed divorce justified, though only
after a considerable period of time and as a last resort. They did not, however, consider
simple physical cruelty cause of any more than temporary separation. (See, for
example, Samuel Maresius, Collegium Theologicum, sive Systema Breve LJniversae
Theologiae, Groningae, 1659, p 230, as quoted in the General Assembly Committee's
report; see also the more extended discussions in Frideric Spanheim, Dubiorum
Evangelicorum Pars Tertia, Genevae, 1639, pp. 603-614 and 886-976 and Gisbertus
Voetius, Politicae Ecclesiasticae, partis primae, Libri duo Posteriores, Amsterdam,
1666, pp. 170-215.)

English and Scottish divines, not having the practical pressure of living on the
continent in close proximity to Roman Catholic countries, often felt no need to address
this question. The assumption apparently was that any physical cruelty or danger was
not in a religious context and could therefore be addressed by the proper exercise of
discipline, both ecclesiastical and civil. Although they recognized that temporary
separation might be necessary while the discipline did its work, such separation was not
thought to be anything but temporary (e.g. Perkins, above). It was not considered
preparatory to divorce.

It may be concluded that there is nothing in Puritan thought which would allow
the suggested re-interpretation of the Westminster Confession. The debate then was
between those who would allow divorce for irremediable physical abandonment and
those who would not. None prior to the Westminster Assembly so much as hints at
interpreting desertion in such a way as to include physical abuse —or other violations of
the marriage contract — as grounds for more than a temporary separation.

II. Biblical

Although for reasons of space and the relative familiarity of most with the
Scriptural data particular attention will not be given to the exegetical considerations, it
should be recognized that the Committee’s recommendations are opposed to all but a
few, contemporary, revisionist interpreters. This is quite evident from careful reading of
the Committee's report. And its conclusions in regard to desertion are based on an

<a id="ga20-p632"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=634 printed_page=632 -->

extension of 1 Cor. 7:12-5, recommending careful examination of intent to see if the
spouse judged to be unbelieving has deserted the marriage (pp. 2344-6). This the
Westminster divines almost certainly would have characterized as studying "arguments
unduly to put asunder those whom God hath joined together in marriage."

IB. Practical

it should be observed that virtually no one holds that a believer must remain ina
situation which is genuinely life-threatening; but any such separation, of however
indefinite duration, must be viewed as temporary and never as a step toward divorce. In
such a situation, as Perkins said, the innocent party must conclude that God has called
him or her to a single life.

The Committee has recommended that the General Assembly receive its report
"as a reliable summary of the Historical and Biblical Data and as drawing from that data
valid conclusions" and to adopt its conclusion "That under extreme circumstances, a
Session may properly judge that such desertion (separation) has occurred, even though
the offending spouse is still physically present in the home" and that the believer is then
free to sue for legal divorce, (pp. 2382-3) If the church endorses such a report, it will
not only have affirmed that which is historically erroneous, but will have abandoned,
both in principle and practice, the historic position of the Christian church.

<a id="ga20-p633"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=635 printed_page=633 -->

CONCLUSION

### I. A SUMMARY OF THE FINDINGS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee was asked to consider:

A. Whether the Westminster Confession of Faith, Chapter 24.6, is more lax or more restrictive than Scripture, and whether the committee would suggest any revisions to that article of confession.

In answer to the first part of this request, the Committee finds the Westminster Confession of Faith is neither more lax nor more restrictive than Scripture if its statement about desertion is understood to apply only when a believer is deserted by an unbeliever as is the case of the Pauline teaching in 1 Cor. 7:15. If this be the case, then the Confession contains Jesus' concern for the permanence of marriage, and would be understood to indicate that only Jesus' statement about adultery and Paul's about the desertion of a believer by an unbeliever are causes sufficient for dissolving a marriage and giving freedom to remarry, and would therefore faithfully reflect the Scripture's teaching about marriage, divorce and remarriage. If however the church, its elders and members understand that the confession's statement on desertion is intended also to apply to a believer separating from a believer, then the confession would be too lax at this point because it would be permitting what Paul denies when he says to two believers when they separate that they "must remain unmarried, or else be reconciled" (1 Cor. 7:11).

Thus in answer to the second part of this request, the Committee would recommend for clarity's sake and to provide a more explicit statement on the question of desertion and separation reflecting the two different approaches which Paul commands (on the one hand for an unbeliever deserting a believer and on the other hand for two believers that separate) an amendment to Chapter 24.6 of the Confession². The Committee would serve the church by suggesting the following wording for an amendment to that section. After the word "desertion" add the words "of a believer by an unbeliever" so that the relevant clause in the section would read as follows: "yet, nothing but adultery, or such wilful desertion of a believer by an unbeliever as can no way be remedied by the Church, or civil magistrate, is cause sufficient of dissolving the bond of marriage". And add as a new sentence at the end of the entire section the words "Believers who separate for reasons other than adultery must remain unmarried, or else be reconciled."

B. Whether a Christian may have other legitimate grounds for divorce, besides desertion by an unbelieving spouse, or adultery (for example, inveterate physical abuse,

2 Compare John Murray who concluded an analysis of the Confession's statement on desertion in light of Scripture with the carefully worded evaluation that "the proposition respecting wilful desertion in the Confession is not sufficiently guarded and delimited so as to confine itself to the teaching of the apostle in this passage" (i.e., 1 Cor. 7:15), Divorce, Philadelphia, 1953, pp. 76-77.

<a id="ga20-p634"></a>
<!-- PAGE ga=20 pdf_page=636 printed_page=634 -->

marital rape or other sexual abuse, attempted murder, or equally serious violations of
the marriage covenant).

We find that Scripture teaches there is only one biblical justification for a divorce,
namely, "sexual immorality" which breaks the one-flesh relationship. Jesus did not
intend by the exception clause to open wide the door for divorce. Porneia is used by
Jesus to refer only to those sexual sins that clearly destroy the marital union.

In 1 Corinthians 7:10-15, Paul is not giving a second ground for divorce. He is
responding to those real life situations where divorce has become a fa it accompli.
According to verses 10-11, if two believers divorce, they are to remain single or be
reconciled. According to verses 12-15, if an unbelieving spouse divorces a believing
spouse, the believer is not bound as he or she would be if the deserting spouse had been
a believer.

In Paul's day, the separation spoken of in 1 Corinthians 7:10-15 was itself an act of
divorce. In our day such separation is not regarded as such. Therefore, the believing
spouse whose unbelieving spouse separates from him or her is left in an anomaly, i.e.,
divorced and free to remarry in the eyes of God (and His Word), but not divorced in the
eyes of the State. To resolve this anomaly the Committee holds that the believing
spouse may initiate legal action to make her biblical divorce legal in the eyes of the
State.

