PART I:

ASSEMBLY

ACTIONS

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS

ABORTION
(See also MISCARRIAGE; PART V: PosmON PAPERS. Abortion. pp. 15-36)
CONCERN OVER:

1976. p. 65.4-57. 3a. The General Assembly answered Overture 4 in the affirmative and
expressed its grave concern over the murder of hundreds of thousands of the unborn through
widespread practice of abortion and that the Assembly appoint a committee to study and bring
back to the 1977 General Assembly a biblical. theological statement on abortion with practical
application.
Overture 4. From Calvary Presbytery
Fathers and Brethren:
Calvary Presbytery respectfully overtures the General Assembly as follows:
Whereas. the Word of God clearly states. indicates and implies in repeated references that
children are a gift from the Lord. and
Whereas. the Scripture clearly teaches that God ordains life in the womb with perfect intent and
definite foreknowledge of the meaning and purpose of that life. and
Whereas. it is stated in the Scripture that God. on occasion even named the baby in the womb
and declared beforehand His intention for that life. and
Whereas. on January 22. 1973. the Supreme Court of the United States declared that the fetus is
not a "person" in the legal sense and that states are forbidden to outlaw abortions
anytime prior to birth if in the opinion of one licensed physician an abortion is
necessary to preserve the "life or health" of the mother. and
Whereas. the "Health" of the mother means. by the court's own definition. "the medical
judgment may be exercised in the light of all factors-physical. emotional. psychological.
familial. and the woman's age-relevant to the well-being of the patient. All these
factors may relate to health." and
Whereas. there are now about one million abortions per year performed in the United States.
Therefore. be it resolved that the Presbyterian Church in America protest, decry. and abhor this
mass slaughter of unborn babies who are "persons" by every right of the just laws of
God and man.
And that the Presbyterian Church in America call upon every responsible citizen to support the
enactment of moral legislation that will protect the life of the unborn child.
POSITION PAPER

(See PART V: rosmoN PAPERS. Abortion. pp. 15-34)
P~tionon.~ended

(See PART V: rosmoN PAPERS. Abortion. p. 34)
P~tion Clarified

(See PART V: POSmON PAPERS. Abortion. pp. 34-35)
PRO-UFE MOVEMENTS

1980. p. 99.8-69. III. 6. That the General Assembly adopt personal resolution No.1 made
by Teaching Elder John Ragland and Ruling Elder G. O. Runnells. as edited and amended. In
subparagraph 5 after the words "concerted effort" add the clause "to support pro-life movements
in their opposition to abortion and". The edited and amended resolution reads as follows:
Whereas. the Sixth and Seventh General Assemblies of the Presbyterian Church in America
affirmed in faithful obedience to our Lord and Sovereign Saviour Jesus Christ. the
prohibition of the Sixth Commandment against abortion on demand. which. as presently
practiced in this country. has resulted in the loss of more than 6.000.000 human lives in
the past decade; and

25

PCADIGEST
ABORTION
Whereas, our Constitutional Standards clearly state that God's commandments specify what
God's people are to do as well as not to do; and
Whereas, the Larger Catechism question 135 ("What are the duties required in the Sixth
Commandment?") states, among other things, "The duties required in the Sixth
Commandmentare, all careful studies and lawful endeavors, to preserve the life of
ourselves and others by ...comforting and succoring the distressed, and protecting and
defending the innocent. "
Whereas, the Report of the Ad-Interim Committee on Abortion to the Sixth General Assembly
recommends that all Christians be reminded of their duty to show compassionate love
and understanding to families in distress as a result of pregnancies, and to offer to those
families sympathetic counsel and help for physical needs where required such duty
being especially incumbent upon us as we minister to the person contemplating
abortion.
Therefore, Be It Resolved that Eighth General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America
recommends its churches to make a concerted effort in their opposition to abortion and
to develop positive ministries to those considering abortions such as evangelism,
Christian nurturing, Christian counseling, and provision of financial and material needs
to the mother and her baby, aid with obtaining medical service, aid with adoption when
indicated, and Christian homes (homes for unwed mothers and homes of Christian
families who are willing to share their homes with a pregnant woman in need of a place
to live away from her immediate family).
And That It Be Further Resolved, that this resolution be placed in the peA Messenger, and sent
in a letter to the churches of the PeA.
1983, p. 115, 11-50, II, 1. With reference to Communication 2: That the General
Assembly approve in principle the idea of a public witness against abortion on demand and
refer this communication to the permanent committee on Christian Education and Publication
for implementation, and that a copy of this report be sent to Mr. Laukhuff.
1983, p. 35, 11-9, A. COMMUNICATION 2: From Perry Laukhuff
Christianity needs a focus for its opposition to abortion on demand. It needs a way in
which its voice can be raised massively and simultaneously against this killing of the innocents.
Abortion on demand, the indiscriminate killing of unwanted babies in the womb, is one of the
greatest moral and sociological problems of our age. It is a grave sin against God. It is a grave
sin against values and beliefs which our Christian faith teaches us to hold most dear, the love,
mercy and creativity of God, the sanctity of human life, the protection of the helpless and the
innocent.
It seems to me that Christian opposition to abortion on demand has been, thus far, on
the sporadic side and largely uncoordinated. Surely, it should not be beyond our ability to
organize a united witness and I therefore have a suggestion to lay before you and the other
Christian leaders listed on the enclosure.
I urge you most prayerfully to consider joining with other Christians in the United
States of America and - hopefully - throughout the world, in designating something like "A
Christian Crusade For Life," to be observed annually on an agreed-upon date. I suggest that
there could not be a more suitable Christian date than the Sunday falling nearest to Holy
Innocents Day, December 28th. Each year this Sunday could be observed in the Christian
churches of the world, as a day of Christian mourning, protest and witness, for life and against
the modem-day Slaughter of the Innocents.
Herod's wanton and monstrous act is being repeated in quite unthinkable magnitude by
20th cenbJry society. What more striking or appropriate contrast could there be than the joyous
celebration of the Birth of our Lord to be followed a few days later by mourning for the babies
never allowed to reach the birth for which God intended them?

26

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
ABSTINENCE
I ask you most prayerfully to please consider this suggestion from a humble Christian
and to consult with other Christian leaders about its suitability and feasibility.
Approved in principle, referred to the Committee for Christian Education and Publications for
implementation.
1984. p. lOS. 12-36. III. 10. That the assignment regarding abortion be handled in the
following manner:
a.
That local churches continue to use the slide/tape program on abortion and distribute
the assembly's position (in booklet form) and that members be encouraged to make our
views known to the elected officials.
b.
That MNA develop a means of assisting CFJP in keeping this issue ( and the General
Assembly's position) before the church and world.

ABSTINENCE
1980. p. 98. 8-69. III. 4a. That Overture 11 be answered in the negative.
Overture 11: From the Presbytery of Eastern Carolina
Whereas, an overture brought before the 1979 General Assembly on the subject of alcoholic
beverages was not received by the Assembly; (Minutes, p. 92); and
Whereas, the General Assembly of 1979 rejected the ruling of the Sub-committee on Judicial
Business that the overture was in order; (Minutes, p. 181); and
Whereas, The Book of Church Order 15-6 authorizes the General Assembly to "recommend
measures for the promotion of charity, truth, and holiness through all the churches
under its care"; and
Whereas, the consumption of alcoholic beverages is one of the greatest hindrances to holiness in
our land; and
Whereas, the Scripture view of Christian liberty is clearly stated in Romans 14:21, 1
Corinthians 8:13, and especially in 1 Peter 2:16; and
Whereas, the consumption of alcoholic beverages continues to be one of the most serious
stumbling blocks in our country today;
Be It Resolved, by the General Assembly in an in thesi deliverance that total abstinence from
alcoholic beverages, except in medicinal use, be the approved position of our
denomination in this matter.
Grounds: The grounds for answering this Overture in the negative are that to adopt position of
total abstinence would go beyond the requirements of scripture, (Deut. 5:32,33; Col. 2:20-23)
and is contrary to the Westminster Confession of Faith, (Chapter 20, subparagraph 2), which
forbid the binding of the conscience by the commands of men.
1980. p. 98. 8-69. III. 4b. That the General Assembly adopt the following statement with
regard to the issue of temperance:
In answering Overture No. 11 in the negative the General Assembly recognizes the
problem of the abuse of alcoholic beverages in our society. For this reason the General
Assembly encourages local churches to:
(1)
Teach and counsel as to the sin involved in the intemperate or escapist
use of any part of creation;
(2)
Teach and counsel the kind of love and wisdom which may lead to individual decisions
to curb or to refrain from the use of a particular aspect of the creation; and
(3)
Proclaim and embody the reality of the work of the Holy Spirit in. the bond of vital
fellowship within the body of Christ which is the biblical antidote to the intemperance
and escapism of our day. (d. Ephesians 5:18 in context.)

27

PCADIGEST

ADMINISTRATION. COMMITTEE ON
COORDINATOR

1983. p. 79. 11-30. III. 3. That the General Assembly redesignate the executive officer of
the COA as Coordinator instead of Business Administrator, with the title Business
Administrator-Treasurer being retained for use in civil or business matters and that Article III,
Section I of the Bylaws of the PCA be amended to read "The officers of the corporation shall be
the Moderator, the Clerk, the Business Administrator-Treasurer (also known as Coordinator) ... "
with appropriate editorial changes in bylaws where necessary, 4-3,3-4.
DUTIES

1974. p. 72. 2-98.
To nominate to the General Assembly a Stated Clerk and a Business Administrator.
The Stated Clerk may serve part time or full time as needed, to reside where he desires.
The General Assembly shall provide office help for him. His duties are: a) handle
records; b) maintain history; c) serve as parliamentarian; d) handle all correspondence;
e) the Committee shall serve as a clearing house for vacant churches and available
ministers.
3.
The Business Administrator shall be a full time employee, preferably not a teaching
elder. He shall maintain the denominational business office, administer all the business
affairs of the Assembly, act as treasurer of this committee, handle annuity and
insurance. He is to be answerable to the Committee on Administration of the General
Assembly.
4.
To review the budget requests of the three other committees; to consider the requests of
each committee as it relates to the budget requests of other committees, to needs and to
opportunities, and to recommend a budget for each of the three committees to the
General Assembly. Each committee shall be responsible to raise the financial support
for its work and distribute its fWlds through its own treasurers elected by each
committee. It shall be clearly understood that churches and individual donors shall be
free to designate their gifts to the causes they desire to support and that there shall be no
equalization of gifts so designated.
5.
The suggested budget of the Committee on Administration shall be presented to the
General Assembly. Upon adoption by the General Assembly, funds for the operation of
the Committee 00 Administration shall be raised by this Committee and distributed
through its own treasurer.
6.
To operate the insurance and annuity program. It shall recommend salaries of
personnel to the General assembly. It shall supervise the work of the Business
Administrator.
7.
The office of Stated Clerk and of Business Administrator may not be held by the same
individual.
8.
Judicial Business Sub-Committee.
a.
To advise the General Assembly on judicial matters.
b.
To assist the Stated Clerk on such matters between Assemblies.
c.
To be elected by the General Assembly.
[cf 1973, pp. 51-52, 1-67 which is essentially a first draft of 2-98 (1974)]
1983. p. 80. 11-30. III. 9. That the Committee on Administration's statement of purpose as
presented in the permanent committee's report be approved.

1.
2.

28

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
ARCHIVES

,

t

\

1983, p. 170, Appendix A, II.
The General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America has mandated the
Committee on Administration to administer its corporate and business affairs in full
compliance with the Book of Church Order and By-laws. The General Assembly has
assigned responsibility to its Committee on Administration on its own behalf to act in
civil matters as a duly elected Board of Directors of the Corporation.
2.
COA purposes to provide suitable facilities for General Assembly meetings. COA will
assist in providing personnel, technology, and facilities to reach the long range goals set
by the General Assembly. COA shall acquire the staff and expertise required to
manage the duties assigned to it
3.
The purpose of the Committee shall be to keep accurate records for the General
Assembly: to implement the GA policy decision regarding the collection and
distribution of monies to committees and agencies which may reduce their individual
cost of operations. COA is charged to analyze and make recommendations for prudent
methods of using General Assembly's resources.
4.
In addition to the above, a purpose of the COA is to supervise the work of its
coordinator and also the work of the Stated Clerk between meetings of the General
Assembly.
1.

ADMONITION
(See PART II: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCO 30-2)
AGENCIES
(See GENERAL ASSEMBLY, REORGANIZATION PLAN; PART V: POSITION PAPERS,
PCA Structure, pp. 516-541)
TRUSTEES UNEXPIRED TERM

(See PART II: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCO 14-1-12, 1985, 1327)

AGREEMENT ON TRANSFER
(See PART V: POSmON PAPERS, NAPARC's Agreement on Transfer of Members, pp.
437-438)
AIDS
(See PART V: POSmON PAPERS, AIDS, pp. 37-50)
ALCOHOL, BEVERAGE USE OF
(See PART V: POSmON PAPERS, Alcohol, Beverage Use of, p. 51)
APOSTASY
(See PART V: POSmON PAPERS, Apostasy and Ecclesiastical Separation, pp. 52-72)
ARCHIVES
(See HISTORICAL CENTER; PART V: POSmON PAPERS, Archives, pp. 73-77)

29

PCADIGEST

ASKINGS
(See GENERAL ASSEMBLY, ANANCIAL POUCIES)

ASSEMBLY TIIEOLOGICAL EXAMINING COMMI'ITEE
1975, p. 93, 3-85. The Committee met and conducted a thorough theological examination
for Jim Alinder (Committee on Mission to the U.S.), Mike Quarles (Committee on Mission to
the World), Harris Langford (Committee for Christian Education and Publications), and Milton
Howland (Stewardship). The Committee voted unanimously to sustain as a whole the
examination of each man and recommend them to the court.
1976, p. 86, 4-82. The Committee met and conducted a thorough theological examination
for Rev. Thomas Hughes as Assistant Coordinator of the Mission to the United States. The
Committee voted unanimously to sustain as a whole the examination and recommend him to the
Court.

1977, p. 107, 5-106.
Recommendation:
the Assembly adopted the following
recommendation:
That the examinations of the Rev. Kennedy Smartt, the Rev. Morton Smith, the Rev. Paul
McKaughan, and the Rev. Charles Dunahoo be approved.
The Assembly adopted a motion that the Minutes of the Theological Examining
Committee be submitted to the Committee of Commissioners on Administration as a matter of
course, beginning with the Sixth General Assembly.
The Assembly adopted a motion that the Assembly should instruct the Pennanent
Committees in writing that in the future Coordinators, Associate Coordinators, and Assistant
Coordinators are not to begin their work without prior examination and approval by the
Assembly'S Theological Examining Committee.
The Assembly adopted a motion that all persons who should have been examined by
the Theological Examining Committee, and have not been, be examined within 30 days, and
that, if they fail, their employment be terminated.
1978, p. 69, 6-33. Recommendations:
1.
That the examination of Rev. Donald Graham be approved.
Adopted
2.
That the examination of Mr. Roy Gamble be approved.
Adopted
3.
That the examination of Rev. Gordon Reed be approved.
Adopted
4.
That the following amendment to paragraph 15-1-14 of The Book of Church Order be
approved:
"The Assembly shall elect a six-man Theological Examining Committee, (three
Teaching Elders and three Ruling Elders of three classes of two men each). This
Committee shall examine all Coordinators, Associate Coordinators, Assistant
Coordinators, and those acting temporarily in these positions who are being
recommended for first time employment by Assembly committees to the Assembly.
They are to be examined in the areas of Christian Experience, Theology, the
Sacraments, Church Government, and English Bible. No person will begin work or
move on the field without prior examination and approval by the General Assembly's
Theological Examining Committee. No person will be presented to the Assembly for
election who has not met the approval of this Committee. Nominations for this
Committee will be presented by the Assembly'S Nominating Committee."
Referred to the Permanent Sub-Committee on Judicial Business
1979, p. 72, 7-15. Recommendations:
1.
That the examination of the Rev. J. Philip Clark be approved for the position as
Coordinator of our Committee on Mission to the United States.
Adopted
2.
That the Assembly direct its Pennanent Committees to have the Committee on
Theological Examinations examine candidates for all positions prior to issuing them a
call.
Adopted

30

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
ASSEMBLY THEOLOGICAL
EXAMINING COMMIITEE

i

I

I
I

i

I
\

1979, p. 104, 7-41, III, 20. Concerning the fourth recommendation of the General
Assembly Theological Examining Committee found in paragraph 6-33 of the Minutes of the
Sixth General Assembly:
That the following amendment to paragraph 15-1-14 of the Book of Church Order be
approved: [See 1978, p. 69, 6-33 above]
...which was referred to the Pennanent Committee on Judicial Business be answered in the
Adopted
affinnative, and passed down to the Presbyteries for their advice and consent.
1980, p. 67, 8-20. The Committee presented the following recommendations:
1.
That RE Edward Robeson, his examination having been sustained, be approved for the
Adopted
position of administrator of Ridge Haven.
2.
That TE Dwight Linton, his examination having been sustained, be approved for the
position of assistant coordinator of the Committee on Mission to the United States.
Adopted
1982, p. 121, 10-95. The Committee reported that, in accordance with the director of the
Assembly (see 10-33, m, 17. p. 69), it has examined and approved James Hughes to serve as
Director of the Insurance and Annuities Office.
1984, p. 189, 12-90, III, 37. That Overture 38 be answered in the affinnative.
1984, p. 55, 12-10. Overture 38
Whereas, the Presbyterian Church in America has wisely directed through its Book of Church
Order that candidates for the office of ruling elder be examined and approved by the
Session of their respective churches BEFORE they are presented to their congregations
for election, and
Whereas, the Presbyterian Church in America has wisely directed through its Book of Church
Order that candidates for the office of Teaching Elder be examined and licensed
BEFORE they are presented to a congregation for election as their pastor, and
Whereas, the General Assembly, as the highest court of the church, should model and exemplify
for the lower courts of the church the best in procedures for nomination, examining and
then electing its coordinators, associate and assistant coordinators and others who
require examination by the Theological Examining Committee of the General
Assembly, and
Whereas, the presentation of any candidate to this committee for examination and approval
AFfER that individual has been elected by the General Assembly puts undue and
unwise pressure upon this committee as it seeks to faithfully carry out its tasks, and
Whereas, for this and other reasons, the Book of Church Order does wisely require (14-1, 14)
that:
No person will begin work or move on the field without prior examination and approval
by the General Assembly Theological Examining Committee.
No person will be presented to the Assembly for election who has not met the approval
of this committee... and
Whereas, in accordance with this constitutional requirement no election of any person requiring
this examination may be made "pending" this examination, but only after this
committee's examination and approval, and
Whereas, in at least one instance, a man was presented to the General Assembly by a committee
of Commissioners "pending" this approval by the Theological Examining committee
(see Report of the Committee of Commissioners on the PeA Foundation, 1983, 11-48,
m,10),
Therefore, be it resolved, that this Twelfth General Assembly does instruct and require that no
person requiring this examination and approval by the Theological Examining
Committee of the General Assembly shall be presented to any committee of
commissioners prior to this required examination and approval, and

31

PCADIGEST
ASSEMBLY THEOLOGICAL
EXAMINING COMMITTEE
Be it further resolved, that no committee of commissioners may present in its report to the
General Assembly any person for election who requires this examination and approval
without an accompanying report of the Theological Examining Committee which gives
its approval, and
Be it further resolved, that this requirement shall be made a part of the Rules for Assembly
Operation and numbered as determined by the Stated Clerk of the General Assembly.
1986, p. 134, 14-55. The report was approved, with an amendment that in the future the
Committee report on the areas of examination.
Adopted
I.
Business Referred to the Committee
A.
Examination of Mr. Robert Sweet of Insurance, Annuities, and Relief,
appointee as Coordinator of Ministerial Relief.
B.
Examination of Mr. Don Gahagen of Mission to the World, appointee as
Coordinator of Latin American Missions.
C.
Examination of Mr. John Rollo of Mission to the World, appointee as
Coordinator of Personnel.
D.
Examination of Mr. Dan Porter of Mission to the World, appointee as
Coordinator of SIMA.
ll.
Committee Action
The Committee examined the four above mentioned appointees and sustained the
examination of each.
1988, p. 464, Appendix P. The Committee met for the purpose of examining Mr. Frank A.
Brock, President-appointee of Covenant College.
Mr. Brock was examined and his examination was sustained. (See report at 16-34, ill,
7, p. 125)
Supplemental Report
The Committee met on June 6, 7 and 8 for the purpose of examining the following
nominees for the Office of Stated Clerk of the PCA: TE Don K. Clements, TE Paul R.
Gilchrist, TE Vaughn E. Hathaway, Jr., TE D. Steven Meyerhoff, and TE Frank D. Moser. The
examination of each was sustained. (See action at 16-81, p. 186)
1989, p. 152,17-82,111,11. ThatBCO 14-1.14 be amended to read as follows:
"14-1.14 The Assembly shall elect a six-man Theological Examining Committee (three
Teaching Elders and three Ruling Elders of three classes of two men each). Nominations for
this Committee will be presented by the Assembly's Nominating Committee.
"This Committee shall examine all first and second level administrative officers of
committees, boards and agencies, and those acting temporarily in these positions who are being
recommended for first time employment. They are to be examined in the areas of Christian
experience, Theology, the Sacraments, Church Government, Bible Content, Church History and
the history of the Presbyterian Church in America.
"No person will begin work or move on the field without prior examination and
approval by the General Assembly's Theological Examining Committee. No first level
administrative officer will be presented to the Assembly for election who has not met the
approval of this committee."
Adopted and sent down to presbyteries for advice and consent
1990, p. 170, 18-77. The Theological Examining Committee met ... for the purpose of
examining Dr. Richard Allen, Vice-President for Institutional Advancement of Covenant
College.
It was moved, seconded and unanimously approved that this examination of Dr.
Richard Allen in its separate parts and in the whole be sustained.
1991, p. 62, 19-11. The Committee met for the purpose of examining Dr. James R. Poteet,
Director-appointee of Ridge Haven, and The Reverend Paul G. Settle, Director of Ministriesappointee of Ridge Haven.
,
The examination for each was sustained.

32

I

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
BOOK OF CHURCH ORDER
1992. p. 88. 20-40. Assembly Theological Examining Committee
During the report on Covenant College, TE Laird Harris presented a report for the
Committee that it had examined and approved Robert Harbert, Covenant College's VicePresident for Business Mfairs. This report was adopted as a whole.
1993. p. 171.21-63. The examinations were all sustained:
TE Fred T. Marsh, Coordinator of Development, MNA
TE Ronald L. Shaw, Missionary Pastor at Large, MTW
Mr. Charles W. Phillips, Vice President of Advancement, Covenant College.
1.
The Committee recommends that the General Assembly instruct its Permanent
Committees to identify the second level positions whose office holders should be
examined.
Adopted
BAPTISM
(See PART V: POSmON PAPERS, Baptism, pp. 78-97)

BETHANY CHRISTIAN SERVICES
1983. p. 124. 11-61. III. 12. That the Assembly approve Bethany Christian Services and
recommend its services to our presbyteries, churches and members.
1985. p. 113. 13-49. III. 13. That the General Assembly review the expansion of the
excellent ministries of Bethany Christian Services, noting the movement into areas of PCA
strength at PCA invitation, and therefore encourage our members and courts to support the
ministries of Bethany even more sacrificially. (See Appendix J, Attachment D, p. 270)

BOOK OF CHURCH ORDER
(The Book of Church Order is updated periodically. These amendments may be ordered from
the Christian Education and Publications Bookstore.)
ADOPTED

1973. p. 32. 1-32. Preface adopted.
1973. p. 32. 1-35. Chapters I-X adopted.
1973. p. 33. 1-39. Chapters XI-XX adopted.
1973. p. 35. 1-46. Chapters XX-XVII adopted.
1973. p. 35. 1-48. Part II, The Rules of Discipline, adopted.
1973. p. 35. 1-49. Part III, The Directory for the Worship of God, adopted.
1975. p. 55. 3-15. Recommendation #3--The Committee recommends the adoption of the
proposed Directory For Worship and that upon its adoption the· Assembly declare the
Constitution of the Presbyterian Church in America to be fully adopted, and that the suspension
of paragraph 26-2 approved by the First General Assembly now be ended.
[Clerk's Note: Recommendation #3 was adopted in general as a procedure, and then the
Directory for Worship was considered by Chapter and paragraph.]
KOREAN

(See PRESBYTERY, KOREAN LANGUAGE PRESBYTERIES, 1987, 15-96, 19)

33

PCADIGEST
BOOK OF CHURCH ORDER
REVISION

1973, p. 35, 1-47. The Constitutional Documents and the Standing Committee on Editorial
Corrections were constituted an Ad Interim Committee charged with the responsibility of
making editorial changes in the Book of Church Order. Such editorial changes shall be subject
to review and ratification by the Second General Assembly. A copy of the Book of Church
Order, including these editorial changes, is to be mailed to all churches by March 1, 1974. (See
page 8 for Editorial Committee.)
The Constitutional Documents Committee is to continue to study further changes in
content in the Book of Church Order, and to submit their recommendations to the Second
General Assembly. Suggestions of such changes are to be submitted to this Committee prior to
June 1, 1974.
1975, p. 51, 3-13.
1.
That the Assembly hereby declares that Part 1, the Form of Government and Part 2, the
Rules of Discipline, having been adopted by the previous Assemblies are open to minor
changes by this Assembly under the suspension of Rule 27-2.
3.
That any changes of major content being recommended either by the Constitutional
Documents Committee, or from any other source, must be handled under the regular
constitutional process provided in 27-2.
BYLAWS
(See INCORPORATION; PART N: BYLAWS, MANUALS AND GUIDELINES)

CANDIDATES
(See MINISTER, PREPARATION FOR THE MINISTRY)

CENSORSHIP
TEXTBOOKS

1987, p.'187, 15-92, III, 4. That the 15th General Assembly adopt the following resolution
on textbook censorship.
Resolution on Textbook Censorship
Whereas, the Presbyterian Church in America recognizes our debt of gratitude to our
forebearers who came to America seeking religious freedom; and
Whereas, Judeo-Christian values had a vital role in the founding of America, the formation of
its institutions, and the making of its national character; and
Whereas, Judeo-Christian values are the source and support of our rights and freedoms as
evidenced in the words of our Declaration of Independence that "all men are endowed
by their Creator with certain inalienable rights, among which are life, liberty, and the
pursuit of happiness;" and
Whereas, the U. S. Supreme Court requires neutrality of religion in the public schools, not
forbidding the teachings of religion's role in history but forbidding the teaching of
tenets of faith; and
Whereas, the Vitz Study completed for the U. S. Department of Education, which examined 90
textbooks used in 72 percent of the classes of our public schools (and corroborated by
other researchers), found the virtual total censorship of the existence, history,
contributions, and current role of the Judeo-Christian heritage from our textbooks; and

34

PCADIGEST
CHAPLAINS
1993, p. 92, 21-41, III, 8. That the General Assembly continue to encourage congregations
Adopted
to adopt a chaplain for prayer and encouragement.
ENCOURAGEMENT

1975, p. 122,3-93, III, A, 6. That we take note of those men serving as PCA chaplains in
the various branches of our Anned Forces and that we encourage them through prayerful
interest in their ministry. Further, the Presbyterian Church in America expects each chaplain to
maintain and teach the Reformed Faith.
1976, p. 59, 4-41, III, A, 8. That we take note of the growing number of men serving as
chaplains in the various branches of our Armed Forces, both on active duty and in the Reserves,
and that we encourage them through prayerful interest in their ministry and by practical support
at the presbytery level.
EVANGEUST, POWER OF

1987, p. 167, 15-83, III, 1. That with regard to the matter assigned to the Permanent
Committee concerning chaplains, the Sacraments, and membership (M14GA, 14-43, m, 11, p.
116; 15-3, p. 66) the following be adopted as the policy for chaplains:
"When a Teaching Elder is endorsed by the Presbyterian Church in America and
receives a Commission from the U.S. government to minister as military chaplain, he may be
granted the powers of an Evangelist to administer the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lord's
Supper by the Presbytery of which he is a member. These powers of an Evangelist are limited
to the Sacraments and will continue in effect until: 1) the chaplain resigns his Commission; 2)
he loses his Commission as a result of administrative action by the government; 3) withdrawal
of ecclesiastical endorsement by the Presbyterian Church in America; or 4) retirement.
In cases of baptism the chaplain shall take responsibility that the newly baptized
member is enrolled as a member of a particular church. The chaplain may arrange for such
enrollment in advance of the administration of Baptism by consulting a session, or the
Presbytery having jurisdiction over the chaplain may provide that all such newly baptized
members shall be enrolled in absentia as a member of a particular church designated by the
Presbytery and with the approval of the Session of that particular church.
Churches may receive in absentia as members baptized personnel and their children
who are unable to be present to be received into membership due to military duty, when
personally examined by a chaplain endorsed by our commission on chaplains. It is expected
that when circumstances permit, such military personnel will become members of a local
church.
When there is no local church available, chaplains shall seek authorization to receive
members in one of two ways: The chaplain may be authorized by the Session of a congregation
of the P.C.A. to receive members into their congregation, or the chaplain may be authorized by
his presbytery to receive members into a congregation which has been designated by that
Presbytery with the consent of that church's session.
In any case, the chaplain shall follow the prescribed teachings of the BCD concerning
the reception of members (especially BCD chapter 6 and 57). Also, the particular church in
which these members are placed shall exercise appropriate oversight and discipline through the
chaplain, the Session, and the Pastor. Special care should be taken both to make these members
feel a part of the particular church and to enable these members to grow in their commitment to
the particular church, as well as in the Christian life."
NATIONAL ~IATION OF EVANGEUCAlS (NAE)

1973, p. 39, 1-57,5. That the Committee on the Mission to the World be cleared to affiliate
with the National Association of Evangelicals in order to benefit from their services and
expertise of the Chaplains Commission, the World Relief Commission and the Evangelical
Foreign Mission Association.

36

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
CHAPLAINS
Whereas, the omission of references in textbooks to the existence, contributions, and current
role of the Judeo-Christian heritage in our society represents, according to the Vitz
Study, "a systematic denial of the history, heritage, beliefs, and values of a very large
segment of the American People" having the Judeo-Christian heritage; and, the
elimination of these references from textbooks may contribute to the hardening of
fertile young minds to the receipt of the Gospel and may minimize to them their nation's
religious heritage and their own religious commitment.
Be it therefore resolved, that the Presbyterian Church in America pray diligently for those who
seek the correction of the censored history of America's development as presented in
textbooks; and
Be it further resolved, that we urge all our members and other Christians to oppose censorship
of the Judeo-Christian heritage as a historical fact from our public school textbooks;
and
Be it finally resolved, that we urge all our members and other Christians to encourage textbook
selection committees working with city, county, and state boards of education not to
accept textbooks that have censored the Judeo-Christian heritage.

CHAIM
1992, p. 76, 20-23, II, B, 6. "Regarding Endorsement of CHAIM"
Whereas, the church has a responsibility to bring the gospel to all peoples, and this certainly
includes the Jewish people;
Whereas, the PCA embraces the Westminster Standards as expressing the doctrinal system
revealed in the Holy Scriptures;
Whereas, an ordained PCA evangelist to the Jewish people has been engaged full time in Jewish
ministry by directing a mission called CHAIM, which conducts ministry in several
presbyteries, has been endorsed in several presbyteries and has been granted tax-exempt
status;
Whereas, CHAIM also embraces the Westminster Standards as its doctrinal basis, is Reformed
and Covenantal in theology, has another PCA minister as the chairman of its board and,
according to its by-laws, requires 3/4 of its board members to be PCA or OPC elders;
Therefore, the 20th General Assembly, through its Mission to North America, based upon the
endorsement of Philadelphia Presbytery, recognizes the spiritual ties between ourselves
and CHAIM and commends CHAIM to the churches of the PCA as a valid and
reformed ministry worthy of the prayers, participation, and support of churches in the
Presbyterian Church in America.

CHAPLAINS
CONFIDENTIAUTY

(See CONFIDENTIALITY)
CONGREGATIONAL RELATIONS TO

1992, p. 77, 20-23, II, C, 8. That the General Assembly encourage U.S. congregations to
"adopt" a chaplain for prayer and encouragement. (Rationale: At present we have an unusually
effective, competent, and godly group of chaplains ministering to our armed forces for the
PCA. However, these men often feel that the denomination is unaware of them and they do not
receive much tangible support from PCA members. Therefore, in much the same way that
many congregations "adopt" foreign missionaries whom they do not financially support, for
correspondence, encouragement, and prayer, we recommend a similar practice with respect to
chaplains. This would not ordinarily include financial support.)

35

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS

r

I

CHAPLAINS
ORDINATION

1993. p. 97. 21-41. III. 15. That Overture 18, "Chaplain Candidates Being Ordained
Without Call," from Rocky Mountain Presbytery be answered in the negative with the following
Adopted
rationale:
The 21st General Assembly reaffinns its conviction that ordination is "the authoritative
admission of one duly called to an office in the Church of God" (!Jeo 17-2), and that "Before a
candidate, or licentiate, can be ordained to the office of the ministry, he must receive a call to a
definite work." (BeO 20-1)
As well, the Assembly affinns the right of the US Military to require ordination prior to
the issuing of orders to the chaplaincy. The Assembly further notes that ordinarily, the military
also requires two years' ministry experience prior to calling a man as chaplain. Thus, ordinarily,
a situation seeming to require ordination prior to a call to the chaplaincy would not occur.
However, the need for more so-called "liturgical" chaplains has led the military to seek PeA
chaplains at a more rapid rate, sometimes without requiring ministry experience, leading to the
"need" to ordain so that a man can be called as chaplain. The situation then has arisen because
of the need in the military for PCA chaplains.
The Assembly rejoices in the number of PCA teaching elders that are being called into
the military chaplaincy leading to the situation before us.
Therefore, no changes are needed in the BeO as contemplated by the overture.
However, the Assembly urges the Joint Commission on Chaplains and Military Personnel to
endorse a candidate for Active or Reserve duty when he 1) has met all the requirements of the
Commission for endorsement, and 2) has successfully completed all the requirements of his
presbytery for ordination, including his ordination examinations. The presbytery would then
"appoint a day for his ordination" (!Jeo 21-4), which would be contingent upon orders from the
military. Immediately upon receipt of orders for active or reserve duty, the presbytery would
conduct the service of ordination.
PRESBYTERY MEMBERSHIP

1990. p. 129. 18-56. III. 10. That the General Assembly recommend that active duty
chaplains affiliate with their denominational presbytery in their geographic area of permanent
assignment unless that assignment is overseas or temporary duty of less than one year.
PUBUC PRAYERS TO BE EXPUCITLY CHRISl'IAN

1989. pp. 93-4. 17-56. III. 12. That the General Assembly approve Attachment F (below)
passed unanimously by the Presbyterian and Reformed Joint Commission on Chaplains and
Military Personnel as an appropriate response for MNA to Resolution #2 (Minutes, 16th GA, p.
84) with the amendment that we adopt the statement as our own with the following change:
That the paragraph "Fourth - We believe it is important that the Assembly remember
who our chaplains are, and those to whom they minister. Chaplains are not pastors of churches,
or professors in seminary, but evangelists in an institutional setting. Their witness is sometimes
like Paul's approach to the Athenians at the Areopagus in proclaiming the changeless gospel
appropriate to a specific context" be replaced by the following: Fourth - We encourage our
chaplains, and all other ministers, to be explicitly Christian in all their public prayers.
ATTACHMENT F
RESPONSE OF THE CHAPLAINS' COMMISSION
to Resolution #2
We appreciate the concern expressed in Resolution #2, directed to the Presbyterian and
Reformed Joint Commission on Chaplains and Military Personnel, which was referred by the
16th (PeA) General Assembly to the MNA Permanent Committee for study and reply to the
17th (PCA) General Assembly. We respectfully reply as follows:

37

PCADIGEST
CHAPLAINS
First - There are at this time no laws or regulations forbidding chaplains to pray "in
Jesus' Name". Chaplains are still being accepted on the basis of, and are expected to minister
according to, the confessional standards of the denominations they represent.
Second - There are, however, at times, and not equally in all branches of the military
services, subtle and sometimes overt pressures upon chaplains to avoid the specific phrase "in
Jesus' Name" when praying at non-sectarian, civil ceremonies. There are no pressures whatever
as to the content of their prayers otherwise.
Third - We agree with the sense of paragraph 9 of the resolution that adding the words
"in Jesus' Name" to a prayer that is out of harmony with God's will and fails to appropriately
recognize Him as the Lord of all, does not suddenly transform that prayer into one that honors
Him. Nor does leaving off that specific phrase void our ability to reach out to God in prayer, or
necessarily imply a rejection or denial of who He is. The issue has to do more with the focal
point of prayer, and the content of prayer.
Fourth - We encourage our chaplains, and all other ministers, to be explicitly Christian
in all their public prayers.
Fifth - Please be assured that your Chaplains' Commission will continue to monitor and
to protest any encroachment upon our religious liberties in the name of pluralism, or
inclusivism. We will also provide support and counsel to individual chaplains who experience
undue pressure to violate confessional standards.
PRFSBYTERIAN AND REFORMED JOINT

COMMI~ION

ON CHAPLAINS AND MIUTARY

PERSONNEL
1976, p. 65, 4-57, 3, c. We recommend that the General Assembly answer Overture 7 from
Pacific Presbytery in the affirmative; and that the Moderator appoint a committee of 8 with 2
alternatives, at least 2 members of the committee being in the Military Chaplaincy, 1 from the
Committee on Mission to the World of the General Assembly, and 1 from the Committee on
Mission to the United States of the General Assembly .
...To order a study which will consider at least these two possible answers to the question:
1.
A separate Commission on Chaplains be established as a part of the Mission to the U.
S. Committee,
2.
A joint commission be proposed to our sister Presbyterian denominations with whom
we are in fellowship.
1977, p. 65, 5-36.
1.
The Committee on Interchurch Relations study the possibility of a joint commission
with the Orthodox and Reformed Presbyterian (CES) denominations;
2.
That at least two active duty military chaplains be appointed by the Moderator to serve
as ex-officio members of the Committee on Interchurch Relations, to serve during study
and discussions concerning the possibility of a joint commission.
The Moderator appointed Chaplain Don K. Clements, and Chaplain Ingram Phillips.
3.
That the matters of denominational examinations of candidates, endorsement through a
recognized Commission and oversight be eventually handled by the MUS Committee;
and that
4.
In the meantime, the MTW Committee continue to examine and endorse chaplains to
the Armed Services through the administrative offices of the NAE.
1978, p.165, App. D.
1.
Be it resolved that the Presbyterian Church in America, in conjunction with the
Orthodox Presbyterian Church and the Reformed Presbyterian Church, Evangelical
Synod, establish the "PRESBYTERIAN AND REFORMED COMMISSION ON
CHAPLAINS AND Mll..ITARY PERSONNEL" for the purpose of providing a joint
endorsing agency for military and institutional chaplains of the three denominations,
and to provide a ministry to our church members and their families serving in the
military.

38

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
CHAPLAINS
2.

3.
4.

5.

That the Assembly adopt the following working agreement:
I.
The structure of the Presbyterian and Refonned Commission on Chaplains and
Military Personnel shall be as follows:
It shall be made up of 3 members from each denomination, elected in
A.
equal classes, with a tenn of 3 years.
B.
Requirements for membership on the Commission shall be set by the
individual denominations.
C.
A quorum for the Commission shall be 5, including at least one
member from each denomination.
II.
Financial support of the Commission shall be as follows:
A.
Travel and meeting expenses for the Commission members shall be
paid by their sending churches.
.
B.
Funds for the work of the Commission shall be collected as follows:
1.
Each denomination shall be asked to contribute $150.00 per
year per active duty chaplain.
2.
Each active duty chaplain endorsed shall be asked to contribute
$5.00 per month if able.
3.
Each reserve chaplain endorsed shall be asked to contribute
$2.50 per month if able.
4.
It is estimated that this scale would produce approximately
$4,000.00 per year for expenses based on the current status of
chaplains.
III.
Responsibilities of the Commission shall be as follows:
A.
Act as the endorsing agency for men entering the chaplaincy.
B.
Hire an executive secretary and define his responsibilities and duties.
Be given the power to receive and disburse funds.
C.
D.
Set forth recommended procedures to be followed by men seeking to
become chaplains.
E.
Provide support and liaison for the chaplain and his family, while
encouraging the sending presbytery to provide pastoral oversight.
F.
Set procedures for regular reporting by chaplains.
G.
Provide coordination of ministry to church members and their families
in the military.
H.
Report annually to each denomination.
I.
Promote the testimony of the Refonned faith to and through the
chaplaincy.
J.
Promote the ministry of the chaplaincy to the member churches.
IV.
Any changes in the denomination makeup of this Commission or any change in
the elements of the working agreement must be approved by all three churches.
That the membership of this Commission shall be at least two active, reserve or retired,.
chaplains, and the third a ruling elder who preferably has had some military service.
That in accord with the action of the Fifth General Assembly (Minutes, page 192) the
matter of denominational examination of candidates, endorsement through a recognized
commission, and oversight be handled by the Mission to the United States Committee,
commencing with the establishment of the Presbyterian and Refonned Commission on
Chaplains and Military Personnel.
That all ordained ministers of the PCA serving in the active duty and reserve military
chaplaincy must serve under the Presbyterian and Reformed Commission on Chaplains
and Military Personnel upon its establishment. Transfers from other endorsing agencies
to the PRCCMP should be completed within one year of the establishment of this
Commission.

39

PCADIGEST
CHAPLAINS

1987, p. 126,15-60, III, 24. That the General Assembly approve the recommendation from
the chaplains' commission that the Refonned Presbyterian Church of North America (RPCNA)
be received as a member of the Presbyterian and Refonned Joint Commission on Chaplains and
Military Personnel, and that the three representatives to which the by-laws entitle them be
seated on the commission.
25.
That the General Assembly urge our churches to "adopt a chaplain" and his family, for
prayer support and correspondence and that this be coordinated through the MNA
office.
26.
That the General Assembly encourage sessions, missions committees, and presbyteries
to invite chaplains to speak in their worship services, missions conferences, and before
their presbytery meetings.
Constitution
(See PART IV: BYLAWS, MANUALS AND GUIDELINES, MNA)
Resolution on Deviant Sexual Behavior
1993, p. 94, 21-41, III 10. That the General Assembly adopt the following:
Whereas, the Bible is our infallible rule of faith and practice, and
Whereas, the Bible establishes that by creation ordinance the heterosexual, monogamous, and
faithful marriage relationship is both God's ordained basis for an orderly society and
God's chosen vehicle to teach about His relationship with his people, and
Whereas, human sexuality has both procreation and mutual love and affection between husband
and wife as its true expressions, and
Whereas, the Bible condemns the inappropriate use of human sexuality including adultery,
fornication, bestiality, pedophilia, incest, homosexuality and any other perversion of
God's gift of sexuality, and
Whereas, it is conceivable that chaplains endorsed by the Joint Commission could well be asked
in the future to compromise their convictions in these matters in carrying out their
ministries,
Therefore, the 21st General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America makes the
following declaration:
The Bible, which is our infallible rule of faith and practice, commands us to
express redemptive love and compassion to all persons. It further commands us to
condemn sexual behavior which deviates from God's revealed standard as sinful and
destructive. The Bible calls all who engage in these behaviors to repentance by turning
to God and proving their repentance by their deeds. The chaplains of the Presbyterian
Church in America are committed to providing a compassionate, redemptive, and
caring ministry to military service members, their families, and other groups among
whom they are called to minister regardless of sexual behavior or the diseases with
which their constituents may be afflicted. Therefore, Presbyterian Church in America
chaplains endorsed by the Presbyterian and Refonned Joint Commission on Chaplains
and Military Personnel will continue to preach and minister in light of the whole
Adopted
counsel of God on these matters.
Gen. 1:27,28; Gen. 2:18-25; Gen. 19:1-29; Lev. 18:6-24,20:13; Prov. 18:22; Mt.
19:4-6; John 2:1-11; Acts 26:20; Rom. 1:24-27; 1 Cor. 6:9-11; 7:2-4; Eph.5:22-23;
Rev. 19:6-9

*

*

40

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS

CHRISTIAN EDUCATION AND PUBLICATIONS (CE&P)
BIBUCAL BASIS

1978, p. 87, 6-75, III, 15. That all Presbyteries, sessions, and members of the PCA be
encouraged to make full use of the programs, materials, and counsel of the Committee and staff
of CFJP and that the General Assembly recognize.
a.
The Church of Jesus Christ is the body of Christ (Eph. 1:22-23) numbering all of the
elect (1 Cor. 1:2, 12:12) who are the "called out" (1 Pet 2:9) for the purpose of
gathering (Mt 28: 16-20) and perfecting of the saints (Eph. 4:11-13).
b.
Christian Education is based in the Covenant of Grace wherein God has revealed
Himself (Gen. 1:1) and progressively reveals Himself with the commandment to teach
others (Gen. 17:17, Deut. 4:5,9,10,14, Deut. 6:6ff, Lev. 10:9-11, Mt. 28:16-20, Acts
1:6-8): so that men may know God On. 14:6,7); so that men may know why they live
(Oeut 6:1-9, 20-25, 1 Sam. 3:7-9); and- so that men may spread the truth (2 Tim. 2:2,
Mt 24\:35,1 Pet 1:24,25) to all the nations (Mt 28:190.
c.
The Great Commission of our Lord Jesus Christ is to make disciples, which includes:
1.
Going to them,
2.
Baptizing them, and
3.
Teaching them to observe all that He has commanded (Mt 28:20).
BOOKSTORE

1977, p. 124, 5-75, III, 12. That the sessions and members of all PCA churches be
encouraged to make full use of the large stock of books and supplies available from the CFJP
bookstore in Montgomery, Alabama.
1986, p. 146, 14-67, III, 18. That the Assembly take this opportunity to express
encouragement in the development of CF./Ps alternative training programs via video and urge
local churches to take advantage of their availability from the CFJP office.
BOOKS, SUGGESTED

1973, p. 56, 1-77. (This paragraph contains a list of approved books to be used as training
materials in absence of our own literature.)
BUlLETIN SUPPLEMENT

1987, p. 148, 15-66, III, 11. That churches not presently using the Bulletin Supplement
from CFJP be urged to contact the CFJP office about using the supplement
CHILD'S CATECHISM

1992, p. 82, 20-36, III, 5. That the 20th General Assembly join with the CE&P Committee
in encouraging the use of either the Catechism For Young Children developed by GCP and
authored by Paul Settle and G. I. Williamson or the original version, and that churches be
encouraged to send the names of children reciting the catechism to CE&P and the PCA
Messenger for recognition.
COlLEGES

(See also CE&P, EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS; COVENANT COLLEGE; PART V:
POSmON PAPERS, Higher Education, pp. 390-397)
1975, 3-81, 30, p. 91. That the General Assembly approve the Permanent Committee's
gathering of information on colleges and commend this information to the sessions; and,
further, that the Committee of Commissioners on Christian Education and Publications review
the contents of this file at the next General Assembly.
[Note: This does not appear to have been done.]

41

PCADIGEST
CHRISTIAN EDUCAnON AND PUBLICAnONS
CONFERENCES AND SEMINARS

1973. p. 58. 1-77.
That all Presbyteries be encouraged to sponsor Youth rallies, camps, or conferences in
the summer of 1974.
19.
That the Assembly's Christian Education Committee sponsor an Assembly-wide Youth
Conference in 1974.
20.
That the Assembly's Christian Education Committee acknowledge the suitability of the
following conferences for youth of the denomination: Pensacola Youth Crusade,
Tampa Youth Conference, Refonned Youth Conferences, Inc.
30.
That the Committee participate in and co-sponsor the annual conference for Reformed
Christian Education jointly with Refonned Theological Seminary, Belhaven College,
and FORCE, if the way be clear.
1978. p. 80. 6-63. II. C. In response to Resolution 10 (Fifth General Assembly) the
Assembly adopted the following statement:
That the Pennanent Committees charged with the responsibility of Conferences and Seminars
be urged to seek and use speakers whose theological views are consistent with the basic Biblical
views of our doctrinal system.
1979. p. 95.7-34.4. That the Assembly commend the summer National Presbyterian and
Refonned Congress meetings to all its churches, and urge attendance at these meetings.
1983. p. 131, 11-75, III, 5. That pastors, sessions, other church leaders, and individuals be
strongly encouraged to take advantage of the variety of conferences and seminars relating to
pastoral skills and other areas of the church's educational and training ministries, such as,
church growth and revitalization, teacher training, officer training, leadership seminars, music
training and family ministries.
1985, p. 87, 13-30, III, 6. That in light of recent surveys and studies surfacing the need for
encouragement for our pastors and wives, local presbyteries work with CE/P Committee in
sponsoring seminars to address those areas through training, counseling and consultations.
(Contact can be made with the CE/P office.)
18.

"CONTINUING••• "

(See MESSENGER)
CONTINUING EDUCATION

(See MINISTER)
CROSS CULTURAL TRAINING
(See also MNA, ETHNIC MINISTRIES)

1986, p. 147, 14-67, III, 22. That the General Assembly urge CE/P as it develops its cross
cultural training and curriculum programs that CE/P work closely with MNA's Special
Ministries personnel in coordinating a strategic plan and making itself available to the MNA
staff for implementation.
CURRICULUM

(See also GREAT COMMISSION PUBLICATIONS; MINISTER, PREPARATION FOR THE
MINISTRY, Candidacy, Uniform Curriculum)

21.

1973, p. 58, 1-77.
That it be understood the Committee recognizes that no book or curriculum material
can be perfect, but seeks to recommend materials basically in accord with the standards
of the church. Each Session must make the final decision in the suitability of materials
used in the congregation'S educational program.

42

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
CHRISTIAN EDUCATION AND PUBLICATIONS
23.

24.
25.
26.

That Sessions be encouraged to make a systematic study of the Church's doctrinal
standards as a necessary step toward fulfilling their responsibility to oversee the
Christian Education Program of the local church and the General Assembly instruct the
Committee for Christian Education to continue to examine and recommend study
materials for church officers.
That Sessions be encouraged to devise a curriculum to fit the particular needs and
opportunities of their local congregations, giving particular attention to the Westminster
Confession of Faith, the Larger, the Shorter, and the Child's Catechism, in all studies.
That sessions examine curricula such as those developed by Briarwood and Granada
with the aim of possibly developing similar programs.
That sessions be advised of the suitability of CE materials published by firms other than
Great Commission Publications for use in certain areas of study, being careful to avoid
uncritical use of materials which present theology contrary to our standards such as
Arminian or Dispensational Teaching.

DIRECfORS AND STAFF MEMBERS INFORMATION

1981, p. 91, 9·36, 111,11. That CFJP be designated by the Assembly as a clearing house for
information about directors of Christian Education and ministers of education, and that this
resource file be made available to churches requesting help in finding such staff members.
DUTIFS

1974. p. 73. 2·98.
To nominate a Coordinator to each General Assembly and recommend his salary to the
Committee on Administration.
2.
To publish official publications of the denomination.
3.
To study and recommend Christian Education curricula programs to the denomination.
4.
To study the possibility of developing curricula by the denomination itself.
5.
To recommend plans for promoting: SlDlday School, Christian Education Work, youth
work, men's work, women's work, camp and conference programs, etc.
6.
To maintain a liaison with other Christian publishers.
7.
To continue to study and make recommendations to the denomination regarding our
needs in schools, colleges, seminaries, and similar institutions.
{See also 1973,1-77, pp. 56-57}
1.

EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
{See also CE&P, COlLEGES; THEOLOGICAL SEMINARIES; COVENANT COLLEGE;

COVENANT THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY; PART V: POSmON PAPERS, Higher
Education,pp.390-397}
1976. p. 53.4-17.
1.
That the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America approve in principle
the establishment of educational institutions associated with the Presbyterian Church in
America, and controlled by the Church through its Courts.
2.
That the Fourth General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America, meeting this
fourteenth day of September, 1976, at Greenville, South Carolina, establishes a special
Steering Committee to study the feasibility of establishing such an institution{s}, and
report their recommendations to the General Assembly through its Christian Education
Committee.
3.
That the Permanent Committee on Christian Education be named the special Steering
Committee to study this matter.

43

PCADIGEST
CHRISTIAN EDUCATION AND PUBLICATIONS
1976, p. 86,4-80,18. Overture 10 as amended be answered in the affinnative.
Whereas, the First General Assembly of the National Presbyterian Church chose to place itself
in the historic tradition of Old School Presbyterianism by its adoption of a Message To
All The Churches of Jesus Christ and in that document specifically set forth its intention
to be the agent rather than merely the superintendent of every aspect of the Lord's work;
and
Whereas, the subsequent development of the Church shows the consistent application of that
principal to foreign missions, home missions, and Sunday schools;
Therefore, Covenant Presbytery respectfully overtures the General Assembly of the
Pre byterian Church in America to appoint the Christian Education Committee to make
recl)mmendations to the next Assembly concerning the following;
1.
Th.lt the General Assembly study the propriety of training men for the ministry in
inslitutions which are not under the discipline of the Presbyterian Church in America.
4.
Th it the General Assembly study the establishment of a seminary under its discipline or
pre vide an auxiliary faculty to be attached to some recognized seminary so that
mi'listerial students could be trained by men primarily responsible to the Presbyterian
Church in America rather than other denominations.
Points 2 and 3 answered in the negative. Points 1 and 4 answered in the affirmative.
FAMILY CONFERENCES

1974, p. 78, 2·102, IV, 10. That Presbyteries or combinations of Presbyteries be
encouraged to conduct family conferences during the year 1975.
1975, p. 89, 3·75, II, B, 7. That the General Assembly authorize and encourage the
Committee for Christian Education and Publications to conduct a Family Conference on the
General Assembly level in 1976.
1975, p. 90, 3·77, 13. That the General Assembly urge presbyteries to conduct conferences
for teaching Reformed theology and its implications for the life and work of the churches and
members of the PCA. (Unanimous)
1975, p. 91, 3·81, 23. That the General Assembly adopt the following resolution:
Whereas, In a day when many forces are at work, consciously and unconsciously, to fragment
the family unit, Presbyterians must return again and again to our historic Biblical
Covenant theology which underlines the oneness of the family, And
Whereas, This theology will best be implemented in a practical way by placing primary
emphasis upon activities that include entire families at the local and Presbytery level.
(During such activities. separate meetings may be held for men, women, youth, and
children, but the overall effect must be to bring families together rather than separating
them. Assembly-wide family conferences may be scheduled during vacation periods
that would enable whole families to spend more time together in a leisurely
atmosphere.)
Therefore, We do not feel that the Presbyterian Church in America should encourage separate
Assembly-wide rallies for men and women.
1976, p. 84, 4-80, 9. That local churches and presbyteries be encouraged to conduct
conferences for teaching the Faith, as expressed in the Westminster Confession of Faith and the
lArger and Shorter Catechism.
1976, p. 85, 4-80, 13. The approval of the continuation of denominational Family
Conferences to be planned and conducted by the Committee for Christian Education and
Publications.
[Note: This has been continued in succeeding years.]
FEDERAL AID, EDUCATION

(See PART V: POSmON PAPERS, Higher Education, Part n, pp. 394-395)

44

I

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
CHRISTIAN EDUCATION AND PUBLICATIONS
FRESH SI'ART PROGRAM

1990. p. 99. 18-34. III. 7. That in our attempt to minister to the needs of people in the
church, especially the singles, divorced and widowed, the Assembly take note of the ministry of
the Fresh Start Program.
FINANCIAL POUCIES

Giving
1976. p. 30. 4-10. Overture 11 ... [That] the General Assembly fulfill the needs of the
Christian Education and Publications Committee and increase this Committee's priority in the
fulfillment of the Great Commission by:
2.
Encouraging the church membership through "Continuing... " and "Commitment" to
realize that designated benevolence giving to Christian Education is just as essential to
canying out the Great Commission as designated benevolence giving to Home and
World Missions.
GREAT COMMISSION PUBUCATIONS

1973. p. 58.1-77.22. That, in following the mandate of the Advisory Convention (Page 26
of Minutes), the General Assembly concur in the action of the Provisional Committee of
Christian Education in appointing a sub-committee of the permanent committee on Christian
Education to join with the Committee on Christian Education of the Orthodox Presbyterian
Church for the purpose of studying and recommending a joint-administrative structure by means
of which the two bodies may join resources and/or personnel for the development of curriculum
materials suitable for use in the respective churches and in Reformed and Presbyterian Churches
at large.
1973. p. 58. 1-77. 29. That the General Assembly commend the materials of Great
Commission Publications to the National Presbyterian Church for use in Sunday School and
Youth Work.
1974. p. 78. 2-102. IV. 11. That the Committee for Christian Education and Publications of
the Presbyterian Church in America enter upon a Joint Venture in Publications with the
Christian Education Committee of the Orthodox Presbyterian Church, such venture to be based
upon the principles of equal control of editorial policy and a share of financial support, with a
view to making the Joint Venture the publishing arm of the two denominations.
1975. p. 89. 3-75. III. B. 8. That the Third General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church
in America directs this Committee for Christian Education and Publications to proceed,
forthwith, to accomplish and perfect, in conjunction with the Committee on Christian Education
of the Orthodox Presbyterian Church, a corporation, under the Laws of the State of Delaware,
which corporation shall be formed for the following purposes:
"To serve as agent for the Presbyterian Church in America and the Orthodox
Presbyterian Church in their work of propagating the Reformed Faith as it is set forth in
the Westminster Confession of Faith and Catechisms through the preparation and
distribution of educational materials consistent with said standards, and by engaging in
such other educational activities, consistent with said standards, as may be related to the
churches' ministry of education. It shall also provide service to other churches insofar
as such service is consistent with the doctrinal commitments of the Presbyterian Church
in America and Orthodox Presbyterian Church."
Be it further resolved that said corporation shall continue for a period of at least five (5) years
under equal policy and program control by the Presbyterian Church in America and by the
Christian Education and Publications Committee of the Orthodox Presbyterian Church:

45

PCADIGEST
CHRISTIAN EDUCATION AND PUBLICATIONS
That the present members of the Christian Education and Publications Committee of the
Presbyterian Church in America now serving as Provisional Trustees for the Great Commission
Publications be authorized, and directed to execute any application for charter, lease agreement,
contract, or any other document necessary for this purpose.
1975, p. 89, 3-75, III, B, 9. That the General Assembly encourage sessions to review
samples of Great Commission Publications Sunday School curriculum materials and consider
the use of these materials in their educational programs.
1975, p. 91, 3-81, 25. ...That subsequent members to the Board of Directors of said
corporation to be formed, be elected from the members of the Christian Education and
Publications Committee in office at the time such election becomes appropriate.
1976, p. 84, 4-80, 6. That the session of each PCA Church not already utilizing Great
Commission Publications Sunday School materials be encouraged to give serious consideration
to using these materials.
1977, p. 76, 5-72, 111,6. That the session of each PCA Church not already utilizing Great
Commission Publications Sunday School materials (grades 1-12) be encouraged to give serious
consideration to using these materials.
(See also 1976, 4-80, 6)
1978, p. 87, 6-75, III, 15. That all Presbyteries, sessions, and members of the PCA be
encouraged to make full use of the programs, materials, and counsel of the Committee and staff
of CF../P and that the General Assembly recognize:
a.
The Church of Jesus Christ is the body of Christ (Eph. 1:22-23) numbering all of the
elect (1 Cor. 1:2, 12:12) who are the "called out" (1 Pet. 2:9) for the purpose of
gathering (Mt. 28:16-20) and perfecting of the saints (Eph.4:11-13).
b.
Christian Education is based in the Covenant of Grace wherein God has revealed
Himself (Gen. 1:1) and progressively reveals Himself with the commandment to teach
others (Gen. 17:17, Deut. 4:5,9,10,14, Deut. 6:6ff, Lev. 10:9-11, Mt. 28:16-20, Acts.
1:6-8); so that men may know God Un. 14:6, 7); so that men may know why they live
(Deut. 6:1-9, 20-25, 1 Sam. 3:7-9); and so that men may spread the truth (2 Tim. 2:2,
Mt. 24:35, 1 Pet. 1:24,25) to all the nations (Mt. 28:19f.).
c.
The Great Commission of the Lord Jesus Christ is to make disciples, which includes:
1.
Going to them,
2.
Baptizing them, and
3.
Teaching them to observe all that He has commanded (Mt. 28:20).
e.
That the General Assembly, through the Stewardship Committee and Administration
Committee report to the next General Assembly in the most specific and statistical
terms the response of the churches, to the exhortation of paragraph "d" above.
1981, p. 90, 9-36, III, 10. That those churches now using Great Commission Publications
be commended for their support and encouragement, and that each presbytery CE Chairman
urge those churches not using GCP material to make every conscious effort to utilize these
valuable tools.
1987, p. 149, 15-66, III, 22. That the Fifteenth PCA General Assembly take note of the
recent action of the Board of GCP in stating that the "contribution inequities" between PCA and
OPC for GCP "involves an in house corporate liability and places no legal obligation on either
denomination." (GCP Board minutes, 9-19-1986, p. 2); that we commend CF../P for its
continuing support of the joint venture; and that we encourage CF../P to set a program priority on
reaching the goal of equal cash contributions with the OPC toward the joint venture with Great
Commission Publications.
1989, p. 81, 17-47, III, 4. That the General Assembly express its thanks to the local
churches using the Great Commission Sunday School material, that the Assembly encourage the
use of the materials by our churches, and that the GCP staff be thanked and encouraged (by the
Assembly) for their labors on behalf of our church.

46

ASSEMBLY ACfIONS
CHRISTIAN EDUCATION AND PUBLICATIONS
1993, p. 74, 21-24, III, 9. That a special prayer of thanks be offered at the end of this
report for the Great Commission Publications' joint venture between the Orthodox Presbyterian
Church and the Presbyterian Church in America and that all our churches be encouraged to use
GCP materials.
Adopted
IDGHER EDUCATION

(See also CE&P, COLLEGES; EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS; THEOLOGICAL SEMINARIES;
COVENANT COLLEGE; COVENANT THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY; PART V: POSmON
PAPERS, Higher Education, pp. 390-397)
1978, p. 88, 6-7S, III, 16. That the General Assembly approve the statement on the
relationship of the Church to higher education contained in ill Part One of the CFJP report,
assigned by the Fifth General Assembly.
LOCAL CHURCH CHRISTIAN EDUCATION STAFF QUAUFlCATION

1990, p. 99, 18-34, III, 9. That in response to the assignment from the 16th Assembly
regarding the general qualifications for local church staff level Christian education persoMel,
the following suggested guidelines be approved.
a.
Understanding and commitment to the Reformed faith.
b.
Ability to apply a Christian world and life view to educational theory and practice.
c.
Demonstration of maturity in personal relationships
d.
Vision for Christian education which is shared by the church employing the person
e.
Demonstration of leadership ability
f.
Demonstration of communication skills
MESSENGER

(See MESSENGER)
NATIONAL CONGRESS ON CHRISTIAN EDUCATION

1990, p. 99, 18-34, 8. That the Assembly approve the concept of a National Congress on
Christian education and training for church, home and school sponsored by CFJP (date to be
aMounced).
Adopted
NEW AGE CRITIQUE

1993, p. 78, 21-30. ... that the 21st General Assembly request Christian Education and
Publications:
1.
prepare materials which will give a concise portrayal of the major tenets of the New
Age for use by our churches;
2.
provide a plan of action our churches can use in exposing and confronting the heresies
of the New Age movement;
3.
give energetic and continuing encouragement to our churches to be active in warning
our nation of the constant menace of the New Age religion; and
4.
be prepared to present to the 22nd General Assembly the results of their work.
PIONEER CLUBS

1984, p. lOS, 12-36, III, 12. That we continue to recommend Pioneer Clubs to our
churches (as was done by the RPCES), and that churches interested in this program for yOWlg
people contact the CF./P office for more details.

47

PCADIGEST
CHRISTIAN EDUCATION AND PUBLICATIONS
PSALM SINGING

1992, p. 102, 20·51, 6. That General Assembly answer Overture #8 as amended in the
affirmative.
Adopted
"Study Committee to Encourage Psalm Singing"
Now Therefore be it resolved, that the 20th General Assembly hereby appoints a sub-committee
of the Christian Education and Publications Committee to formulate practical ways in
which Psalm singing can be encouraged in the congregations of the Presbyterian
Church in America and other Reformed churches and to make report' regarding this at
next General Assembly; that this sub-committee have a budget of $3,000, to be raised
through donations; ...
1993, p. 75, 21·25.
1.
That the General Assembly reaffirm that Psalm-singing in the worship of God is a
Gospel ordinance, is commended by the Westminster Confession, and is an historic
practice of Reformed churches.
Adopted
2.
That the General Assembly give thanks to God for the revival of the use of Psalms and
Psalm portions in contemporary worship settings. We recognize the need for the
Church to continuously encourage the singing of Psalms in ways that both honor God
Adopted
and communicate to the culture of the day.
3.
That congregations be encouraged to sing at least one Psalm at each of their services.
Adopted
4.
That congregations be encouraged to identify Psalm-settings as Psalms, when they are
sung.
Adopted
5.
That hymnal-using congregations be encouraged to use the Psalm-rich Trinity Hymnal
(since it averages 10 times the number of Psalms as the comparable Evangelical
hymnals).
Adopted
6.
That a program of re-education be undertaken by the CE&P Committee including:
a.
Articles in the Messenger that explore such things as the history and value of
Psalm singing.
b.
Providing instruction in its educational material on the Scriptural mandate and
historic precedent for Psalm-singing in the worship of God, and the many ways
in which the person, sufferings, resurrection, and ongoing Messianic work of
Christ are set forth in the Psalms.
c.
Produce worship bulletin inserts which feature two Psalm settings as found in··
the Trinity Hymnal, thereby promoting both the hymnal and Psalm-singing.
Adopted
7.
Form an ad hoc committee of the CE&P to complete the discussion with the RPCNA to
the end that a simplified edition of The Book of Psalms for Singing might be produced
with this format:
- a complete Psalter
- words only (normally one tune and version per Psalm)
- a slender, inexpensive hymnal supplement
Adopted
8.
The funding be private, details to be worked out by the CE&P Committee in
discussions with the RPCNA's Crown and Covenant Publications.
Adopted
9.
That Christian Education and Publication contact other Reformed denominations
informing them of the above recommendations and of the availability in the near future
of the adapted edition of The Book of Psalms for Singing with a view to encouraging the
use of this metrical version of the Psalms in those Presbyterian and Reformed Churches
in America which do not currently use a denominational Psalter.
Adopted

48

I

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
CHRISTIAN EDUCATION AND PUBLICATIONS
PUBUCATION STYLE

1973. p. 57. 1·77. 7. That in all printed materials by all committees a common stylistic
image be presented.
PURPOSE

1982. p. 65. 10·31. III. 2. That the Assembly approve both the purpose statement of the
Pennanent Committee, which says, "Our defined purpose is to serve as a resource to the courts
and congregations of the PCA by providing the training, curricula and publication necessary to
develop skills needed in their work of evangelism and the equipping of the saints to serve God
and each other in all of life throughout the world", and the manner which we have applied that
purpose as reflected in I-V of our report.
REGIONAL TRAINERS

1993. p. 73.21·24. III. 3. That the CE/P Committee and staff give diligence to expanding
their core of regional trainers to assist presbyteries and local churches in their Christian
education and leadership training programs and working under the concept of the PCA School
of Christian Education by Extension.
Adopted
SCHOLARSHIP roND

1974. p. 84. 2·107. The General Assembly approved the establishment of a student
scholarship fund, to be designated as the recipient of any memorial funds given for
scholarships.
1980. p. 73.8·29. III. 14. That the General Assembly continue to support the development
of a Christian Education and Publications scholarship fund for ministerial candidates.
SERVICFS

1986. p. 147.14-67. III. 19. That the Assembly continue to offer the services of the CE/P
to presbyteries in their role of encouraging, equipping and ministering to their pastors, wives
and other leaders.
1987. p. 149. 15·66. 111.16. That clerks of sessions and presbyteries be asked to cooperate
with CE/P in distributing promotional materials to their respective members informing them of
the various conferences and training programs conducted by CE/P during the coming year.
STEWARDSHIP

(See STEWARDSHIP; STEWARDSHIP COMMITTEE)
mEOLOGICAL SEMlNARlFS
(See also CE&P, EDUCATIONAL

INSTITUTIONS; COVENANT THEOLOGICAL
SEMINARY)
1973. p. 24. 1·10. Overture 8
That an ad-interim committee be appointed to study the needs of theological education within
our denomination; to examine those that exist, and if none be found, to recommend the
establishment of a theological seminary true to our standards and government.
1973. p. 57. 1·77. 4. That presbyteries, in view of the fact that the denomination has no
official connection with any seminary at this time, be diligent in counseling candidates for the
ministry to attend seminaries that are committed to that view of Scripture set forth in the
Westminster Standards and of the Refonned Faith, examples of which are Refonned
Theological Seminary, Jackson, MS; Westminster Theological Seminary, Philadelphia, PA; and
Covenant Theological Seminary, St. Louis, MO.

49

PCADIGEST
CHRISTIAN EDUCATION AND PUBUCATIONS
1974, p. 51,2-61. This Committee determines that the Committee for Christian Education
and Publications· has responsibility for seminaries as set forth in the Minutes of the Fust General
Assembly on page 57.
However, this Committee takes note of recommendation number 11 of the Report of the
Committee on Mission to the United States concerning the shortage of ministers in the
Presbyterian Church in America and recommends that the General Assembly charge the
Cominittee for Christian Education and Publications, in consultation with the Committee on
Mission to the United States, to formulate plans and programs for extension seminaries.
1977, p. 76, 5-72, III, 3. That the Assembly approved an amendment to the Permanent
Committee for Christian Education and Publications Report that paragraph 4, item 2, page 152,
be deleted. The Assembly adopted a motion that paragraph 4; item 2, be amended by adding
"Reformed Presbyterian Theological seminary, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania," immediately
following "St. Louis, Missouri;"
1977, p. 152, Appendix F. The proposal is that presbyteries, in view of the fact that the
denomination has no official connection with any seminary at this time, be diligent in
counseling candidates for the ministry to attend seminaries that are committed to that view of
Scripture set forth in the Westminster Standards and of the Reformed Faith, examples of which
are Reformed Theological Seminary, Jackson, MS, Westminster Theological Seminary,
Philadelphia, PA, Covenant Theological Seminary, St. Louis, MO, and Reformed Presbyterian
Theological Seminary, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and/or attend any regional seminaries that may
develop co-operative agreement with such seminaries in the training of our men academically
and establish a plan which would involve direct training in the pastoral ministry by the
presbyteries of the PCA.
1981, p. 99, 9-43, III, 5. That Covenant College and Covenant Theological Seminary shall
be received as denominational institutions under their present Articles of Incorporation and Bylaws...
[Note: Adopted in 1982, p. 19, 10-2.]
1986, p. 147, 14-67, III, 27. That the Assembly answer Overture #55, p. 46 in the negative,
on the grounds that the reference to "approved or recognized seminaries" is not appropriate.
There are none, with exception of Covenant Seminary which is the denominational seminary.
1987, p. 98,15-29, 111,6. That seminaries at which PCA candidates study, presbyteries and
churches be urged to publish the need for ordained teaching elders to serve on Mission to the
World's church-planting teams.
1988, p. 122, 16-33, 111,13. That in light of the Assembly assignment to CFJP in 1986, the
Assembly receive as information Attachment A, p. 343, to this report as the response of the
Adopted
Certification Committee regarding seminaries.
1988, p. 343, Appendix D, Attachment A.
REPORT ON SEMINARY'S CURRICULUM AND
CONFORMITY TO THE PCA'S UNIFORM CURRICULUM
Preamble: This committee's findings are simply a comparison of the stated curriculum
of the seminary with the uniform curriculum of the PCA. These findings are not an evaluation
of the quality of the course offerings and should not be interpreted as PCA approval,
endorsement, or accreditation.
The following seminaries meet the criteria of the uniform curriculum, with the
following notations:
PCA RELATED SEMINARIES:
G.A. related
Covenant Theological Seminary (no notation)
Presbytery related
Birmingham Theological Seminary (no notation)
Session related
Greenville Presbyterian Theological Seminary (no notation)

50

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
CHRISTIAN LIBERTY
INDEPENDENT SEMINARIES COMMITrED TO TIlE WCF:
Westminster Theological Seminary (no instruction in the BCD)
Westminster Theological Seminary, West (All courses of U.C. are either required or aVailable.)
Refonned Theological Seminary (no notation)
Biblical Theological Seminary (Biblical qualifies its commitment to the WCF: "Although
Biblical Theological Seminary is committed to the doctrinal position of the Westminster
Confession of Faith, we are also committed to a respect for diversity in what are, by
consent, deemed to be essentials. In this determination the non-denominational posture
of the Seminary is reflected, although our conservative evangelicalism in its Reformed
expression yields less diversity in doctrine than might be found at some other
seminaries." Statement of Educatiooal Philosophy, Missions and Goals, p. 14)
INDEPENDENT AND NOT COMMITrED TO WCF:
Columbia Biblical Seminary (All courses of U.C. are either required or available. CBS does
infonn PCA students concerning their need to chose electives which are designed to
meet the U .C.)
Footnotes:
1. The criterion for a seminary to be PCA related is that they be under the jurisdiction
of a church court.
2. For those seminaries that offer elective courses that are required by the unifonn
curriculum, students and presbyteries need to be careful that the requirements of the unifonn
curriculum are met.
UNIFORM CURRICULUM

(See MINISTER, PREPARATION FOR THE MINISTRY, Candidacy)
WEEK OF PRAYER

1988. p. 210. 16-91. III. 29. That CM undertake the Stewardship and Week of Prayer
responsibilities for 1989.

yovm MINISTRIES
(See also PIONEER CLUBS; EDUCATION, CONFERENCES & SEMINARS; MISSION TO
NORTH AMERICA, COllEGE CAMPUS WORK)
1975. p. 88. 3-75. 5. That the General Assembly approve the establishment of a Youth
Ministries Advisory Subcommittee of the Committee for Christian Education and Publications,
whose members shall be appointed by the committee for Christian Education and Publications.
1975. p. 90. 3-78. 17. That the General Assembly approve the development by the
Committee for Christian Education and Publications of summer church service opportunities for
PCAyouth. (See 3-81)

CHRISTIAN LIBERTY
(See ABSTINENCE)

51

PCADIGEST

CHURCH
TIlE AGENT OF MISSIONS

1992, p. 77, 20-23, II, C, 4. That the General Assembly reaffirm its commitment to the
church, the Body of Christ, as that primary vehicle through which God seeks to receive and to
display his Glory and by which He extends His kingdom; and that the Assembly call on the
churches and presbyteries of the Presbyterian Church in America to seek to insure that their
prayer, energy, manpower, and financial resources actually serve to enhance the building of the
Church of our God and Savior.
ARCHlTECI'URE

1975, p. 112,3-89. The following was received as information, and ordered to be printed:
Recommendation 10: The Committee recommends that item 5 be answered as follows:
To item 5 asking for a definition of what constitutes proper architecture "to exhibit the
Refonned Christian Faith truly, accurately and majestically," the Assembly responds: "The
Bible does not describe buildings for ~e of congregations in worship, and thus the Church has
no right to legislate regarding architecture. There are some basic principles that should govern
our thoughts in this area.
First, there should be nothing that directly contradicts any clear Scriptural teaching,
such as, the erecting of images or idols as forbidden by the Second Commandment
Second, the Reformed principle of worship should be observed, namely, that we are to
include in our worship only that which is either expressly set down in Scripture, or may by good
and necessary consequence be deducted from it Nothing should be built into the sanctuary that
would cause the congregation to break this principle. For example, the Bible does not authorize
the use of any visible representations of God or any part of His creation as a center of worship.
The sanctuary should not include such, either as stained glass windows, crosses, or other
symbols. Christ gave us only one thing by which to remember Him - the Lord's Supper. The
use of other things for this purpose has no Biblical basis, and should be discouraged.
Third, the Reformed view of worship emphasizes the centrality of the reading and
proclamation of the Word. Thus, the preferred arrangement of the sanctuary is one that
preserves the centrality of the pulpit.
Fourth, since the Reformed Faith views the Sacraments as an extension of the pulpit in
that they are "sensible signs" by which "Christ and the benefits of the new covenant are
represented, sealed and applied," the placement of the baptismal font and communion table in
relation to the pulpit so as to symbolize this concept is most desirable.
Fifth, since the Lord's Supper portrays the communion of the congregation with her
Lord, it is most suitable that the congregation be seated around the table of communion, or at
least, that the table be placed on the level of the congregation and not elevated above it
Finally, it should be remembered that the true beauty of worship is found in the
presence of the Holy Spirit with the congregation. Thus elaborate places of worship are not
necessary for proper worship of the Living God. Care should be taken, on the other hand, to
provide a place of suitable dignity for the Spiritual worship of God. The exact form of the
sanctuary is thus unimportant, so long as the congregation has a suitable place in which to
worship God in an orderly fashion. Since church buildings, as such, have no place in the life of
the Church in the New Testament, it is incumbent upon modem congregations to consider
carefully the matter of how much should be invested in such properties, lest they become an end
in themselves, diverting the efforts of God's people from their primary task.

52

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
CHURCH
BUDGETS

1983, p. 158,11-87,3. That the General Assembly strongly encourage all PCA churches to
use calendar year budgeting for salaries and employee benefits.
1986, p. 132, 14-53, III, 3. That the General Assembly strongly encourage all PCA
churches to complete their annual budgeting by December 15 so as to expedite the handling of
annual billing for JAR plans to the churches.
BUILDING

(See MNA, SUll..DING CLUB; FIVE IN FIVE; REVOLVING SUll..DING F1JND; INVESTOR'S
FUND FOR BUILDING & DEVELOPMENT; PART IV: BYLAWS, MANUALS and
GUIDELINES, MNA, Policy Manual)
CONGREGATIONAL MEETINGS

(See PART II: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCD 24-6, 1986, 14-52,
44; BCD 25-2,1983,11-36, #34)
Not Subject to Complaint
(See PART IT: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCD 42, 1986, 14-52,
16, #1)

DAUGHTER CHURCHES
1992, p. 77, 20-23, II, C, 9. That the General Assembly urge every congregation to
consider the possibility of participating in starting a daughter church.
Adopted
DlSCIPUNE

(See PART m: JUDICIAL CASES, #65)

MEMBERSIDP

Course of Instruction
1973, p. 64, 1-80, 4. That the First General Assembly recommend to all sessions that a
course of instruction in Presbyterian doctrine and polity be given to all prospective members
prior to their reception. The Christian Education Committee is asked to prepare materials to
assist Sessions in this.
Date of
1987, p. 169, 15-83, III, 7. That the Assembly answer Constitutional Inquiry #1 as follows:
Constitutional Inquiry #1. From the All Saints Presbyterian Church, Richmond, VA, regarding
the time of membership.
"We would like to know what date to use for a person's 'Date of Admission' in the church roll
book: the date they are examined and received by the Session or the date they take their vows
of membefshlp before the congregation?"
ANSWER:
"The date of admission to communicant membership is that of the reception by the session,
except when there are any pending or cootingent actions stated in the sessional actioo of
reception or required by the BCD, then the date of admission will be the date these matters have
been completed."
Grounds: This is more precise language than that proposed.
Reaffirmation i Faith
(See PART II: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCD 58-6, 1978,6-111,
#17)

53

PCADIGEST
CHURCH

Resign
(See PART IT: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCD 46-5, 1986, 14-52,
12)

Transferred Within NAPARC
(See PART V: POSmON PAPERS, NAPARCs Agreement on Transfer of Members, pp.
437-438)
Willful Neglect
(See PART IT: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCD 46-5,1986,14-52,
12)
PROPERTY
(See also QUIT CLAIM DEED)
1973, p. 55, 1-73....That this General Assembly instruct its Judicial Committee to assist
and aid such churches in every way possible [in regard to church property matters]' and be it
Further Resolved, that the General Assembly be led in an appropriate prayer for a clear and
speedy resolution of His will in these cases immediately following the adoption of this
resolution.
1974, p. 72, 2-98. It was moved and carried that the Commissioners Committee on Judicial
Business recommend to General Assembly that it take action to establish a fund to assist needy
churches involved in litigation over their property, as recommended by the presbytery in whose
boundaries they are located; all subject to approval of the Committee on Administration. This
fund is to be a voluntary fund, which is to be publicized.
1975, p. 67, 3-49, A. That the consulting arrangement and provision for maintaining
"Clearing House" files be continued with Attorney Owen Page of 305-307 Realty Building,
Savannah, Georgia 31401.
ROLL
(See PART ill: JUDICIAL CASES, #9)

Non-Communing
(See PART IT: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCD 38-2, 1986, 14-52,
16, #6)
Removal from
(See PART IT: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCD 38-4, 1986, 14-52,
11; BCD 46, 1986, 14-52, 14; 1988, 16-77,29; BCD 46-5, 1986, 14-52, 16, #5; 1988, 16-77,28)
TAXATION

(See PART V: POSmON PAPERS, Church/State, m, pp. 123-128; Taxation, p. 552)
TREASURER

(See PART IT: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCD 9-4, 1987, 15-83,
#9)

54

ASSEMBLY ACflONS
CHURCH/STATE RELATIONS
TRUSTEES

(See also PART IT: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION. BCO 26-6. 1979. 741. #3)
1982. p. 102. 10-75. III. 20. That Overture 17. 00-12. p. 45) be answered in the negative.
Grounds: The office of Trustee is not introduced into our fonn of government as an
ecclesiastical office since it is not provided for in Scripture. although the civil magistrate may
require Trustees (Directors). In this the Church is acting in obedience to the head of the
Church. In situations envisioned in the Overture. the Board of Deacons has complete liberty
under our fonn of government to enlist supplementary assistance. for which purposes they may
draw upon the entire particular church membership.
1982. p. 106. 10-75. III. 40. That the General Assembly declare that congregations
received into the PCA this year through the reception of the RPCES be given until December
31. 1983. to make adjustments needed. if any. in their local church structures as they relate to
trustees. The Clerk is to infonn the former RPCES Churches of this fact.
UNION

(See PART V: POSmON PAPERS. Church Union. pp. 146-149)
VOTER

Minimum Age
(See PART IT: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION. BCO 24-3. 1982. 10-75.
#10; 1984.12-53.#60)
CHURCHISTA TE RELATIONS
BIBUCAL, HISTORICAL & CONTEMPORARY CONCEPTS

(See PART V: POSmON PAPERS. Biblical. Historical & Contemporary Concepts. pp.
103-117)
CIVIL AunlORITY

(See PART V: POSmON PAPERS. PCA Structure. pp. 516-541)
INCORPORATION

(See also PART V: POSmON PAPERS. Church/State. IT. pp. 118-122)
1984. p. 187. 12-90. III, 23 ....That the General Assembly instruct it [COAl to prepare and
publish infonnation on such questions as: Should a church be- -incorporated. and if so. under
what circumstances? What are the rules governing the parsonage allowance? What changes
were made in 1983 in the social security tax law? What ethical rules should a church follow in
handling contributions and other financial responsibilities? The General Assembly directs the
Committee on Administration to convey to members of Congress and the administration its
conclusion that the Social Security Act Amendments of 1983 do not adequately consider
"church-state-entanglement" aspects of the legislation. and to seek redress.
PUBUC SCHOOLS

(See also PART V: POSmON PAPERS. Higher Education. Part IT. pp. 394-395)
1983. p. 116. 11-50. II. 5. KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS. that the
Presbyterian Church in America in seeking to fulfill the Great Commission of spreading the
Gospel to all peoples. sees the freedom of expression as a vital element of our society;
Whereas. there is a widespread attack against religious freedoms and religious expression,
particularly in the public schools of the United States;

55

PCADIGEST
CHURCHISTATE RELATIONS
Whereas. the Supreme Court of the United States has ruled that students cannot. of their own
initiative. offer verbal prayer in the lunch room; that Christian groups cannot have equal
access to classrooms before or after school; that Christians cannot read and discuss
prayers from the Congressional Record on school property before school; and imposed
other unconscionable restrictions upon Christians and Christian groups;
are
consistently taught as fact in the public schools of the United States;
Whereas. the Supreme Court of the United States has previously declared humanism to be a
religion. yet has applied restrictions only upon the expression of Christian ideals and
values;
Whereas. there is presently pending a suit which arose in Mobile. Alabama styled !shamel
Jeffree vs. the School Board. et ale in which an agnostic parent is seeking to remove
from the public schools all material and teaching which would encourage or foster a
belief in religion;
Whereas. the plaintiff has sought to remove from the public school system any mention of
God's name. but has not sought to remove the teachings of the ideals and values of
humanism and other non-theistic religions;
Whereas. here at issue is whether humanism and non-theistic religions will have exclusive
access to the minds of students or whether we will allow toleration of divergent ideas;
Whereas. Judge Brevard Hand. Chief Judge. Second Federal District Court of the State of
Alabama. has ruled that the United States Supreme Court has erred in its interpretation
of the Constitution of the United States in the area of First Amendment freedoms.
Whereas. the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals has ordered Judge Hand enter an order
enjoining religious activities in Mobile County Public Schools;
Whereas. this matter is now on appeal to the United States Supreme Court;
Whereas. there is a general lack of awareness of the status of law. its interpretation and
application by the United States Supreme Court, and the extent of the restrictions
presently enforced in the public school system against Christians and Christian groups;
and
Whereas. the Religious Freedoms Defense Fund. which is being incorporated as a fund of
Ridgewood Presbyterian Church. P.C.A.• exists for the purpose of certain legal
expenses in this case.
Be it Therefore Resolved. that the General Assembly of the PCA shall recommend prayer. the
dissemination of infonnation. and financial encouragement for this stand against the
continuing encroachment and denial of the God-given rights guaranteed by the First
Amendment to the United States Constitution.
RFSPONSIBIUTIES

1984, p. 139, 12-53, II, 57. That the Assembly ratify the answer to the following
Coostitutional inquiry:
Coostitutional Inquiry 7: From the Session of Salem Presbyterian Church of Gaffney. South
Carolina.
In light of our responsibilities to God and to the state. what constitutional advice can be given to
help us know how to approach church/state relations in these difficult matters?
ANSWER:
This matter is being referred to the General Assembly for study and advice. Recognizing that
the Lord alone is Lord of the conscience. we recommend that if a church is under pressure of
appearing to violate a law of any civil government and has scruples of conscience against
compliance with said laws that the church. if it complies. consider doing so under protest with
reference to any requirements for applications and payment of any taxes with reference to these
laws.

56

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
COMMITrEES. PERMANENT
SUMMARY POSITIONS

(See PART V: POsmON PAPERS. ChurchlState. Summary. pp. 98-102)
1988, p. 204,16-91, III, 3. That the summary positions of the Church-State subcommittee's
report be adopted as amended by the 16th GA.
TAXATION

(See PART V: POsmON PAPERS. ChurchlState.

m. pp. 123-128; Taxation. p. 552)

CML DISOBEDIENCE
(See PART V: POSmON PAPERS. ChurchlState. V. pp. 140-145)
COLLEGES
(See CUP. COLLEGES; EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS; COVENANT COLLEGE; PART V:
POSmON PAPERS. Higher Education. pp. 390-397)
COMITY AGREEMENT (GOLDEN RULE)
(See INTERCHURCH RELATIONS. COMITY AGREEMENT)
COMMISSIONS
MATTERS ASSIGNED TO

(See PART II: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCO 15-2, 1985, 13-45,

#55)
POWERS

(See also PART II: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCO 15-1, 1985.
13-45, #47)
1978, p. 40, 6-11, B. Reference 2: From Texas Presbytery
The Presbytery of Texas, in hearing the report of the Committee on Ministerial Relations and
Candidates, approved a motion to refer Item H of the report to the General Assembly for a
ruling. Item H is as follows:
This committee has the authority to act as a commission of Presbytery in dissolving pastoral
relationships in cases where the pastor and congregation formally concur or where no
congregations are concerned to dismiss other ministers, licentiates, or candidates at their
request. The committee chairman shall inform the stated clerk of this action and the clerk may
then dismiss the minister.
1978, p. 113,6-111, III, 21. Reference 2
That the Sixth General Assembly advise Texas Presbytery that item H is constitutional.
However, this Assembly cautions the Courts of this Church against granting blanket
commission powers to its Permanent Committees. Ordinarily, commissions are established to
act on behalf of a Court in a particular matter within a limited time frame (ref. BCO 16-2).

COMMITTEES, PERMANENT
(See GENERAL ASSEMBLY, COMMITIEES; PART V: POSmON PAPERS, PeA
Structure, pp. 516-541)

57

PCADIGEST

COMMITfEES OF COMMI~IONERS
(See GENERAL ASSEMBLY)
COMMUNICATIONS
1990, p. 99, 18-34, III, 14. That the General Assembly appoint an ad hoc committee of
seven people, of which one member shall be appointed by each Program Committee (MTW,
MNA and CE & P), and four members designated by the Assembly at large to study the whole
area of PCA communications: (including printing and mailing of materials by Committees and
others); what should be done, by whom and how and who will fund it, and report back to the
1991 Assembly. The cost is not to exceed $6,000. The funding of the ad hoc committee will
come from CF./P and the accounting shall be reflected in the CFJP minutes.
1993, p. 72, 21-22. The Ad Interim Committee on Communications, appointed by the
Eighteenth General Assembly "to study the whole area of PCA communications ...what should
be done, by whom, and how and who should fund them .... ", has been working diligently to
review all current communications media presently utilized by PCA agencies, with special
emphases on the PCA Messenger.
Due to the complex nature of the task, and of possible recent breakthroughs in its efforts
to engage all PeA agencies in the review, analysis, and recommendations process, the
Committee has been unable to complete its work and requests the Assembly to continue this
Committee at least one more year, or until its task is completed.
1.
That the General Assembly continue this Committee and instruct it to report to
Adopted
the Twenty-Second General Assembly.
1993, p. 77, 21-29.... referred to the Ad Interim Committee on Communications .
...that the 21st General Assembly instruct the MESSENGER, through CF./P, to allow,
encourage, and stimulate articles and editorials that provide for the dissemination of accurate
information among the "grass roots" membership of this denomination regarding the concerns,
activities, actions, and issues within this body and its constituent membership.
COMMUNION
(See also PART II: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCD 58-4; PART
m: JUDICIAL CASES, #23; PART V: POSmON PAPERS, Fencing the Lord's Table, pp.
294-299; Paedocommunion, pp. 498-515)
1979, p. 102, 7-41, 6. That answer 4 (p. 180) to the Rev. James C. Bland regarding the
procedure for giving Communion to members of the Congregation who are unable to attend
worship services be approved
The Committee recommended that the following procedure be used when giving
communion to members of the congregation who are unable to attend worship service:
The Sacrament of the Lord's Supper may be administered to those who are ill, elderly or
infirm, provided that the Session authorizes an abbreviated service of worship to
convene at a specified time and place, following announcement, and with the Teaching
Elder and at least one Ruling Elder in attendance.
1984, p. 103, 12-31, III, 9. That Overture 56, be answered in the affirmative .... That the
Twelfth General Assembly appoint a study committee to reassess the PCA's current practice
with regard to the Lord's Supper and her covenant children in the light of the overall teaching of
Scripture.
1988, p. 120, 16-30. (See full Report on "Paedocommunion," PART V: POSmON
PAPERS, pp. 498-515)
1.
That the PeA continue the practice defined in our standards and administer the Lord's
Supper "only to such as are of years and ability to examine themselves."

58

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
COMPENSATION FOR
COORDINATORS AND DIRECTORS
2.

That the Committee on Paedocommunion prepare an annotated bibliography of sources
both for and against the practice, and that resources be collected by the Committee for
distribution to those who request them (at the requesters' cost) to study this matter
further.
To answer Overture 12 to the Fourteenth General Assembly (14-4, p. 49 and 14-52, 28,
3.
p. 127) in the negative.
4.
That those ruling and teaching elders who by conscience of conviction are in support of
the minority report concerning paedocommunion be notified by this Assembly of their
responsibility to make known to their presbyteries and sessions the changes of their
views since their ordination vows.
1993, p. 181,21-64, III, 32. That Personal Resolution #8 from TE Frank Moser concerning
fencing of the Lord's table during General Assembly communion be answered in the
affirmative.
Adopted
Whereas, in the opening worship service of the 21st General Assembly, the sacrament of the
Lord's Supper was celebrated without the appropriate fencing required by the Book of
Church Order, 58-4, namely in the omission of any reference to those invited being
"communicants in good standing in any evangelical church" or any words to that effect;
and
Therefore be it resolved, that the 21st General Assembly instruct the Administrative Committee
to take such steps as are expeditious and necessary, such as including this direction in
the written manual (if such exists) for those in charge of arranging for this service each
year, so that the Lord's Table may from this time forth be properly fenced at each and
every celebration of the sacrament of the Lord's Supper at subsequent General
Assemblies.
COMMUNISM
1978, p. 110,6-111, III, 2•... That this General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in
America record its unalterable opposition to atheistic communism and that the Churches urge
their members to register their opposition by writing the President of these United States and
their Congressmen, urging them to exert every possible effort to resist the further encroaching
of this Godless ideology.
COMPENSATION FOR COORDINATORS AND DIRECTORS
1984, p. 184,12-90, III, 16. That the General Assembly direct COA to make a study of the
philosophy of the salary structure with reference to the coordinators, taking into account in the
replacement of coordinators such matters as years of experience, ability and education in
determining starting salaries and whether these warrant starting a new coordinator at the same
base level as his predecessor, and to report to the next General Assembly.
1985, p. 140, 13-73, III, 39. That the Assembly extend the wodc of the Ad Hoc Salary
Study Committee of COA to the 14th General Assembly in order to provide additional
guidelines for salaries at all levels for the Committee staffs along with initial personnel policy
manual to be presented to the 1986 General Assembly.
1986, p. 172, 14-74, III, 36. That a salary compensation package of $45,365 for FY87 be
approved for coordinators and stated clerk with an allowable salary package range of 15 percent
below or above the approved figure.
1987, p. 189, 15-91, III, C, 16. That the total compensation, including all benefits of
Coordinators, Directors and Presidents and Stated Clerk, be set forth in their respective budgets.
1988, p. 209, 16-91, III, 10. That the Permanent Committee's Coordinator compensation
range for all coordinators for FY89 be $41,787 to $56,535.

59

PCADIGEST
COMPENSATION FOR
COORDINATORS AND DIRECTORS
1989, p. 134, 17-81, II, 16. That each Pennanent Committee's Coordinator compensation
range for FY90 be $54,800 to $63,700.
1989, p. 135, 17-81, II, 29.
That the 17th GA require that all
coordinators/directors/presidents salary line items must be split with a line showing salary plus
housing, and another line showing benefits.
1989, p. 135, 17-81, II, 30. That the 17th GA require that where a car is provided as a
personal benefit, in contrast to a business tool, it must be shown as a benefit as part of the total
compensation package.
1990, p. 112,18-40,111, A, 35. Note: This replaces Recommendation 5.
That the Administrative Committee shall annually determine and recommend a salary range for
the coordinators of the permanent committees and CEOs of the General Assembly's agencies
and shall notify each committee and agency board of such salary range for preparation of their
budgets. It is t.D1derstood that the salary of the CEO of the Insurance, Annuity and Relief Funds
shall be subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees of IAR, according to the terms of the
trust agreements between the Trustees and the General Assembly.
1991, p. 125, 19-61, III, 17. Approve the total Compensation Range for coordinators for
1992 as follows:
Low
Median
High
AC
$58,842
$66,866
$74,890
CE&P
59,148
67,214
75,280
MNA
61,321
69,683
78,045
MTW
75,386
85,666
95,946
77,806
87,143
CC
68,469
CTS
60,151
68,353
76,555
51,032
61,809
72,586
RH
IAR
63,840
72,546
81,252
IFBD
55,553
63,906
72,259
PCAF
56,189
63,851
71,513
And that the range for coordinators be adjusted every three years from this year, since there is a
24% variance within the range.

COMPLAINTS
(See PART II: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCO 39-2, 1984, 12-53,
156)
NOTICE OF

(See PART II: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONsrrrunON, BCO 43-4, 1985, 13-45,
153)
SUSPEND AcrION

(See PART II: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCO 43-4,1985,13-45,
'53)
CO~UTERS

1981, p. Ill, 9-55, III, 3. That the General Assembly direct its Committee on
Administration to conduct a study concerning the coordination of computer operations of
denominational offices in the office of the business administrator.

60

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
CONFESSIONAL SUBSCRIPTION
1983, p. 83, 11-30, III, 36. That the Committee on Administration be directed to form an
advisory committee, which shall include representatives of the committees and agencies using
the data processing center operated by the COA to expeditiously determine an appropriate
solution to the problems presently experienced by the using committees and agencies. The
COA shall not purchase additional computer hardware or software until the advisory committee
has reported and its report has been acted on by the COA, except such peripheral equipment as
may be necessary to maintain operations until the study is completed and a decision reached.
Any using committee or agency may, at its expense, employ qualified consultants to assist the
advisory committee in its deliberations in drafting its report.
It is the sense of the General Assembly that the denomination will maintain a coordinated
approach to data processing.
1983, p. 159, 11-87, III, 9. That the General Assembly assign a Highest Priority to
adequate computer support to the Trustees and all other church agencies.
1984, p. 187, 12-90, III, 27. We recommend that the General Assembly authorize the
raising and expenditure of the necessary funds to implement the updating of the computing
ability of the General Assembly.

CONFFSSIONAL SUBSCRIPTION
(See also MINISTER, PREPARATION FOR THE MINISTRY, Ordination; MTW, SUPPORT, NonReformed Agencies, 1979; PART II: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, 15-1,
1985, 13-45, #47)
1982, 10-75, 24, p. 103. That the paper "Confessional Subscription" be received as
information and that it be commended to the presbyteries, Sessions and Board of Deacons for
study.
[Note: For the text of this report see the Minutes.]
1982, p. 103, 10-75, III, 25, A. That the Questions in Personal Resolution 5, Ninth General
Assembly, on "Confessional Subscription" be answered with the following response:
Q.l.
Does the second ordination vow require the Presbyterian Church in America church
officers to embrace as Bible truth each and every statement in our confessional
standards?
A.
When an officer of the Presbyterian Church in America subscribes to the Confessional
Standards, he is declaring them to be the confession of his faith with reference to
doctrine, worship, and government, recognizing that the Word of God written is the
only infallible, inerrant, unamendable rule of faith and practice.
H not, then what statements in the confessional standards are to be regarded as
Q.2.
"fundamentals of the system of doctrine," which, if a man should fail to embrace them,
would disqualify that man from holding office in the Presbyterian Church in America?
Q.3.
Maya man be lawfully received/ordained/installed within the Presbyterian Church in
America who rejects either implicitly or explicitly any of the following doctrines, and if
so, which?
Any of the so-called "five points of Calvinism. "
a.
b.
Sabbath observance as set forth in the Confession.
c.
Baptizing only once.

61

PCADIGEST
CONFESSIONAL SUBSCRIPTION
A.

Answer to Q. 2 and Q. 3. It would be unwise, improper, and unconstitutional for the
General Assembly to determine abstractly apart from the proper processes afforded by
our constitutional standards what would disqualify a man from holding office in the
Presbyterian Church in America. The constitution provides that the standards of our
church may be modified if it should be proved from the Word of God, our only inerrant
and unalterable guide to faith and practice, that the standards are in any way not in
agreement with that Word. Also, as the result of proper judicial processes, judgments
may be made which determinately interpret what mayor may not be in accord with our
standards. Any other procedure of setting forth or compiling a list of essential or
nonessential doctrines would, in effect, amend the standards by an unconstitutional
method. The Westminster Confession of Faith and Catechisms are already held by our
church as "standard expositions of the teaching of Scripture in relation to both faith and
practice" (}JCO 29-1) and all officers and candidates for office in the Presbyterian
Church in America are required to adopt our standards sincerely and without mental
reservation (WCF 22-4) as faithful expositions of Bible truth.
The approval of any man for office belongs, in the first place, to the court of
jurisdiction (}JCO 21-5). The Church has always reserved to herself the prerogative of
determining what views shall not be in accord with the standards. No officer should
presume to have the right of making a self-evaluation regarding the conformity of his
view.
Any exception to the constitutional standards may have the potential of striking
at the vitals of religion (see BCO 34-5), even one which some may consider to refer to
an obscure or very technical point of doctrine. A system of doctrine is made up of
constituent parts, so that a variation in one of these parts may logically effect a change
in the system as a whole. Any court of jurisdiction should therefore give careful
consideration to any exception a man might reveal or take with regard to the
constitutional standards before detennining that an exception is or is not in conformity
to the standards and/or proceeding to receive, ordain, and/or to install him.
If a man makes known to his session/presbytery a fundamental change in his doctrinal
Q.4.
views, what would be the appropriate action or actions of the session/presbytery in the
case of a ruling elder, in the case of a deacon, or in the case of a teaching elder'?
A.
Should a man make known any changes in his doctrinal views, the procedure which the
respective court of jurisdiction should follow would apply equally to a deacon, ruling
elder, or teaching elder. The court of jurisdiction should investigate the matter. Then
its subsequent actions would be dependent upon the findings of its investigation. If the
court should find that the exception is such as to warrant judicial process, the procedure
as set forth in the BCO (see chapters 27 - 37) should be followed. Or, if the court of
jurisdiction should find that the exception does not warrant judicial process, due
minutes of the proceedings should be recorded noting the exception and the action of
the court.
1986. p. 125. 14-52. 13. That the answer of the Permanent Committee concerning
Constitutional Inquiry 15 from the Gainesville Presbyterian Church, Gainesville, VA be ratified
as amended as follows:
1986. p. 331. Appendix I. 5. Constitutional Inquiry #5. From the Gainesville Presbyterian
Church regarding men who have taken exceptions with the Constitutional Standards.
"... [W]e have a considerable amount of disagreement over how a teaching or ruling
elder is to handle the issues on which he differs from the official PCA stand. Specifically, is he
allowed to preach and teach his views even when they differ from the views of the
denomination'?

62

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
CONSTlTIJTIONAL BUSINESS COMMI1TEE

ANSWER:
When a man is ordained with the allowance of exceptions to his full acceptance
of the PCA standards, he thereby obtains (1) approval of his suitability to function within the
ordained office, and (2) liberty to believe and live in some way not fully in accord with some
portion of those standards. This allowance of exceptions, however, does not warrant his
teaching or preaching of that matter so as to disturb the peace and purity of the church. The
court of jurisdiction must determine in each situation whether such unwarranted actions have
occurred.
CONFIDENTIALITY
STATEMENT OF

1982, p. 89, 10-66, III, 18. The Assembly is asked to take note of the "Statement of
Coofidentiality" prepared by the Commission as requested by the Ninth General Assembly.
STATEMENT ON ·CONFIDENTIALITY"
1.
Whereas, since the laws of the United States of America clearly define the subject of
privileged communication between a clergyman and a person with whom he has a
professional relationship; and,
2.
Whereas, the laws of all states (with the exception of Alabama, Connecticut,
Mississippi, New Hampshire, Texas, and West Virginia) have various statutes defining
the subject of privileged communication between a clergyman and a person with whom
he has a professional relationship; and
3.
Whereas, notwithstanding the applicable laws which apply in criminal proceedings, all
clergymen may be open to and subjected to civil suits for malpractice in cases resulting
from professional relationships;
4.
Therefore, the Tenth General Assembly of the PCA recommends that all Ministers of
the Word and any others, such as Ruling Elders, Deacons, or non-ordained laity who
are involved in professiooal counseling ministries, take the following action:
a.
Clearly familiarize themselves with the appropriate federal and state laws
which define the subject of privileged communication between a clergyman and
a person with whom he has a professional relationship. To this end, the advice
and counsel of a knowledgeable attorney is recommended.
Consider the possibility of purchasing an individual or church-group insurance
b.
policy to provide professional liability coverage (malpractice insurance). To
this end, it is recommended that an agent representing the St. Paul Property and
Liability Insurance Company be contacted, since they are the only U. S.
company providing such individual coverage for clergymen as of this time.
CONGREGATION
(See CHURCH)

CONSTITUTIONAL BUSINESS COMMITfEE
[Note: formerly the Permanent Sub-Committee 00 Judicial Business]
AU11fORITY, UMITS OF .

1986, p. 126, 14-52, 15. That the answer of the Permanent Committee cooceming
Coostitutional Inquiry #7 from the Missouri Presbytery, be ratified.
1986, p. 331, Appendix I, 7. Constitutional Inquiry #7. From Missouri Presbytery
regarding procedure in the course of a trial. See Recommendation 15.

63

PCADIGEST
CONSTITUTIONAL BUSINESS COMMITTEE
ANSWER: It appears to the Committee on Judicial Business that answers to the questions it
has been asked would in effect resolve many of the issues raised in the complaint pending
before the Presbytery. It would be improper for the Committee on Judicial Business to
predetermine substantive matters regarding which a complaint has been filed, or in which the
matter is already in judicial process (MIIGA, p. 97, item 8). We suggest to the presbytery that
if they find themselves in the situation described in BCO 41-2, they might consider referring the
complaint, or the entire matter, to the General Assembly.
MANUAL

(See PART IV: BYLAWS, MANUALS AND GUIDELINES; RAO 7-2)
MINUTES

1988, p. 175, 16-77, III, 19. That the Permanent Committee on Judicial Business, as a
permanent Committee of the General Assembly, is to keep its minutes according to the
guidelines set out in RAO 8-13 which apply to all permanent committees of the General
Assembly.

CONSTITIJTIONAL INQUIRIES
(See PART II. INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION BY THE ASSEMBLY)
CONTINUING REVELATION
(See PART ill: JUDICIAL CASES, #12; #50)

CORPORATIONS
(See CE&P, GREAT COMMISSION PUBUCATIONS, 1975, 3-75, III, B, 8; COVENANT
COLLEGE;
COVENANT
THEOLOGICAL
SEMINARY;
INCORPORATION;
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH IN AMERICA FOUNDATION; RIDGEHA YEN)

COURTS
HIGHER, POWER

(See PART ill: JUDICIAL CASES, #9; #33)
LOWER, BYLAWS

1976, p. 72, 4-71, III, A. With respect to a communication from Rev. Donald Dunkerley
concerning the oversight of a church without a session but with at least one ruling elder, the
Committee would direct attention to Paragraph 12-2 of the Book of Church Order beginning
with the word "secondly" and continuing through the end of the paragraph which gives church
courts latitude to establish rules as needed agreeable with Scripture and doctrines which are not
in violation of the Constitution of the Church.
COVENANT COLLEGE
(See also CE&P, EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS; PART V: POSITION PAPERS, Higher
Education,pp.390-397)
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION

(See PART IV: BYLAWS, MANUALS & GUIDELINES)

64

I

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
COVENANT COLLEGE
BOARD OF TRUSTEES
1983, p. 77, 11-27, III, 2. That since Covenant College was received by the Joining and
Receiving with its Bylaws intact. and since the Bylaws of the College have always allowed for a
limited number of members from other NAPARC churches to be elected to the board, the
Committee of Commissioners recommends that the Bylaws of the General Assembly be
amended to provide for the Assembly to be able to elect to the Board of Trustees of Covenant
College one male member of any NAPARC church to each class of the Board (total of up to
four).
BYLAWS

(See PART IV: BYLAWS, MANUALS & GUIDELINES)
CAREER PLANNING

1979, p. 113, 7-49, III, 6. That all PCA churches be informed of the availability of the
career planning program for youth being developed by Covenant College in conjunction with
the Committee for Christian Education and Publications.
DENOMINATIONAL INSTITUTION

1981, p. 99, 9-43, III, 5. That Covenant College and Covenant Theological Seminary shall
be received as denominational institutions under their present Articles of Incorporation and Bylaws ...
[Note: Adopted in 1982, p. 19, 10-2]
DUE PROCESS

1986, p. 172, 14-74, III, 34. That the action taken by the Board of Directors of the PCA
meeting June 20,1986, "That the General Assembly accept the report of the Board of Directors
that they have completed their assignment by the 11 th General Assembly (and continued by the
12th and 13th Assemblies) 'to establish guidelines for a working relationship and due process
between Covenant College and Covenant Theological Seminary and the courts of the PCA'
(J.111GA, 11-36, III, 54, p.lOl)" be approved.
GUIDELINES FOR A WORKING RELATIONSHIP AND DUE PROCESS
BETWEEN COVENANT COLLEGE AND THE COURTS OF THE PCA
1.
In all cases involving administrative action against employees of Covenant College, the
Board of Trustees shall be the last resort for any appeal as it (the appeal) relates to the
status of employment.
2.
In cases involving dismissal of members of the PCA for doctrinal deviation or moral
failure, it shall be the duty of the Board of Trustees to notify the appropriate church
court within the denomination in order that the court bring charges if it so desires.
An employee who is a member of the PCA and is dismissed for moral or theological
3.
reasons may appeal to a church court for the purpose of clearing his or her name of any
moral or theological charges. If such an appeal is successful, however, it will not
automatically overturn the decision of the Board of Trustees with respect to status of
employment. The Board of Trustees retains the final authority with respect to
employment status.
4.
An employee who is not a member of the PCA and is dismissed for moral or theological
reasons has no right to appeal beyond the Board of Trustees.
5.
An employee who is dismissed for other than moral or theological reasons has no right
to appeal beyond the Board of Trustees.
If any court of the PCA feels that there are moral or theological issues which need to be
6.
dealt with within the faculty or staff of Covenant College, it should proceed with
judicial action in accordance, with the Book of Church Order and notify the President
that such judicial action has been initiated.

65

PCADIGEST
COVENANT COLLEGE
7.

H a church court below the level of General Assembly were to find an employee of
Covenant College and a member of the PCA guilty of moral or theological deviation,
the college would ordinarily either (a) tenninate the employee's relationship with the
college, or (b) suspend the employee pending the outcome of any appeal to a higher
court.
If a recommendation came from the General Assembly to terminate an employee for
moral or theological reasons, then the college would have no alternative but to follow
that directive.

8.

PHILOSOPHY OF EDUCATION

(See PART V: POSmON PAPERS, Higher Education, Part m, pp. 395-397)
SCHOLARSHIPS

(See CE&P, SCHOLARSHIP FUND)
SUPPORT

1980. p. 73. 8-29. III. 12. That Covenant College continue to be commended to our
churches and to our people for support in prayer, students and finances.
1980. p. 73. 8-29. III. 13. That local churches continue to encourage their young people to
participate in the Career Planning Program sponsored by Covenant College.
1981. p. 90.9-36. III. 9. That churches be urged by the Assembly to encourage the support
and utilization of Covenant College.
[Note: Continued in succeeding years.]
1993. p. 71. 21-21. III. 2. ...designate October 17 as Covenant College Sunday and
encourage churches to observe the day...
Adopted
WORKING RELATIONSHIP

1983. p. 101. 11-36. III. 54. That the Eleventh General Assembly direct the COA to
establish guidelines for a working relationship and due process between Covenant College and
Covenant Theological Seminary and the courts of the PCA. The study should be done in
consultation\vith the boards of Covenant College and Covenant Theological Seminary.
COVENANT TIlEOLOGICAL SEMINARY
(See also CE&P, EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS; mEOLOGICAL SEMINARIES)
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION

(See PART IV: BYLAWS, MANUALS AND GUIDELINES)
BYLAWS

(See PART IV: BYLAWS, MANUALS AND GUIDELINES)
DENOMINATIONAL INSTITUTION

1981. p. 99.9-43. III. 5. That Covenant College and Covenant Theological Seminary shall
be received as denominational institutions under their present Articles of Incorporation and ByIIWS.•.
[Note: Adopted in 1982, p. 19, 10-2]

66

ASSEMBLY ACI10NS
COVENANT THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY
DUE PROCESS

1986. p. 172. 14-74. III. 34. That the action taken by the Board of Directors of the PCA
meeting June 20, 1986, "That the General Assembly accept the report of the Board of Directors
that they have completed their assignment by the 11 th General Assembly (and continued by the
12th and 13th Assemblies) 'to establish guidelines for a working relationship and due process
between Covenant College and Covenant Theological Seminary and the courts of the PCA'
(MllGA, 11-36, m, 54, p.lOl)" be approved.

GUIDELINES FOR A WORKING RELATIONSHIP AND DUE PROCESS
BETWEEN COVENANT THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY AND THE COURTS OF THE PCA
The Faculty Manual on pp. 3 and 4 outlines the procedure for dismissal of a professor.
The procedure specifies that an appeal can go all the way to the Board of Trustees, whose action
in the case shall be final. The guidelines which follow are intended to clarify how this
procedure relates to the interest and jurisdiction of the General Assembly of the PCA or some
lower church court in such cases.
Guidelines
1.
In all cases involving administrative action against employees of Covenant Theological
Seminary, the Board of Trustees shall be the last resort for any appeal as it (the appeal)
relates to the status of employment.
2.
In cases involving dismissal of members of the PCA for doctrinal deviation or moral
failure, it shall be the duty of the Board of Trustees to notify the appropriate church
court within the denomination in order that the court bring charges if it so desires.
3.
An employee who is a member of the PCA and is dismissed for moral or theological
reasons may appeal to a church court for the purpose of clearing his or her name of any
moral or theological charges. If such an appeal is successful, however, it will not
automatically overturn the decision of the Board of Trustees with respect to status of
employment. The Board of Trustees retains the final authority with respect to
employment status.
4.
An employee who is not a member of the PCA and is dismissed for moral or theological
reasons has no right to appeal beyond the Board of Trustees, within the PCA.
5.
An employee who is dismissed for other than moral or theological reasons has no right
to appeal beyond the Board of Trustees, within the PCA.
6.
If any court of the PCA feels that there are moral or theological issues which need to be
dealt with within the faculty or staff of Covenant Theological Seminary, it should
proceed with judicial actioo in accordance with the Book of Church Order and notify
the President that such judicial action has been initiated.
7.
If a church court below the level of General Assembly were to fmd an employee of
Covenant Theological Seminary and a member of the PCA guilty of moral or
theological deviation, the Seminary would ordinarily either (a) terminate the employee's
relationship with the Seminary, or (b) suspend the employee pending the outcome of
any appeal to a higher court.
8.
If a recommendation came from the General Assembly to terminate an employee for
moral or theological reasons, then the Seminary would have no alternative but to follow
that directive.

MDIV
1987. p. 103. 15-34. III. 8. That crs be commended for broadening the base of their
MDiv program to train a larger number of the body of Christ for specialized ministries not
requiring ordination while still maintaining their focus on preparing men for ordination to the
gospel ministry.

67

PCADIGEST
COVENANT THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY
MINUTES

1986, p. 137,14-57, III, 10. That all policies, curriculum revisions, and documents referred
to in the Minutes of the Board of Trustees and Executive Committee be appended to their
Minutes and supplied to the Committee of Commissioners through the Stated aerk's Office.
1988, p. 127, 16-37, III, 4. That the General Assembly direct the secretary of the Board of
Trustees to communicate any Board of Trustees or Executive Committees minutes of meetings
prior to General Assembly of each year to the Committee of Commissioners on Covenant
Theological Seminary.
PURPOSE

1987, p. 103, 15-34, III, 5. That the GA commend crs for its concise Statement of
purpose as a Seminary of the PCA:
"The purpose of Covenant Theological Seminary is to train servants of the triune God, in
walking with God, in interpreting and communicating God's Woed, and in leading God's
people."
RFSPONSIBIUTY TO

1982, p. 65, 10-31, III, 7. That in light of the reception of the RPCES, the Assembly
reaffirm its support foe that part of the "joining and receiving" plan approved by the Ninth
General Assembly which specifies that Covenant Theological Seminary will report directly to
the Assembly through its own Committee of Commissioners; and further, that the Assembly
reaffirm the responsibility of CFJP to oversee and coordinate the denomination's program for
theological training, particularly through support of the Certification Committee.
1983, p. 75, 11-24, III, 5. That Covenant Seminary continue to be accountable directly to
the General Assembly through a Committee of Commissioners on Covenant Seminary.
1983, p. 75, 11-24, III, 6. That the relationship of Covenant Seminary to the Permanent
Committee on Christian Education and publications be that of liaison and an exchange of
information on matters of mutual concern.
1983, p. 101, 11-36, III, 53. That the following advice to the Stated Clerk regarding the
General Assembly's "review" of Covenant Theological Seminary be ratified:
"It is the understanding of the SOB that the word "review" (see M9GA, 9-43, m, J, 5, i, p. 100)
in the Joining and Receiving Agreement means that the General Assembly has the final
responsibility in regard to decisions relating to Covenant Theological Seminary." (See also
Recommendatioo 51.)
SCHOLARSHIPS

(See also CE&P, SCHOLARSHIProND)
1986, p. 137,14-57, 111,6. That the Presbyteries be advised of matching scholarship grants
through crs and be encouraged to assist the students under their care by meeting their
matching fund challenges.
SUPPORT

1982, p. 120, 10-93, III, 2. That the Assembly grant Covenant Seminary permission to
present its ministry to presbyteries and local congregations, and that the Assembly encourage
local congregations to contribute financial support to the Seminary.
1983, p. 75, 11-24, III, 3. That the churches be asked to support theological education with
faithful prayer and regular giving and to seek to support Covenant Seminary at the level of the
ASKINGS requested by the Stewardship Committee.
[Note: Reaffirmed in succeeding years.)

68

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
DAYS OF PRAYER AND FASTING
TRV~

1982, p. 120, 10-93, III, 3. That the Board of Trustees of the Seminary be pennitted to
communicate with the Presbyteries when nominations of new trustees are considered.

DATA PROCESSING
(See COMPUTERS)

DAYS OF PRAYER AND FASTING
1973, p. 24,1-10. Resolution
Whereas the central task of the Church is summarized in the Great Commission of our Lord
Jesus Christ, Matthew 28:18-20. therefore. be it resolved that the First General Assembly of the
Cootinuing Presbyterian Church request its Committee 00 Mission to the World:
1.
To designate a day of their selection as a day of prayer and fasting for the world
mission of the Church. and.
To provide appropriate material for promotion of such a day.
2.
[Note: Reaffirmed every succeeding year.]
1975, p. 64, 3-46, 3. Overture 20
Whereas. the United States of America is in its Bicentennial celebration. and
Whereas, we as a nation stand at one of the most critical junctures of its 200 year history, and
Whereas, the Scriptures instruct us to pray for all men, kings, and all that are in authority (1
Timothy 2:2; Ezra 6:10), and
Whereas, the Scriptures also teach us to pray for the nation and city in which we dwell
(Jeremiah 29:7; Psalm 122:6). and
Whereas, God set for the requirements for revival to be followed by His people (2 Chronicles
7:14),
Now Therefore, Grace Presbytery overtures the Third General Assembly of the Presbyterian
Church in America to call for a Day of Prayer and Fasting for revival in the United
States. And further, that this day of Prayer and Fasting be set for July 4. 1976. and all
congregations of the Presbyterian Church in America be called to set aside and observe
this day for the above stated purpose.
1979, p. 97,7-37, III.
1.
That Resolution 1 (p. 39) be answered by the following substitute:
Whereas, in the life of Israel under the Old Covenant. in the practice of the early church and
among Refonned Assemblies of modem times, God's people have resorted to corporate
prayer in times of great moral and spiritual crisis with confidence in God's promise: "If
my people which are called by my name shall humble themselves. and pray, and seek
my face and tum from their wicked ways; then will I hear from heaven, forgive their
sins and heal their land." (2 Chron. 7:14); and
Whereas, this is such a time in the life of our nation and throughout the world;
Now, therefore, be it resolved, that the Seventh General Assembly call upon the congregations
of the Presbyterian Church in America to set regular times of prayer for revival and
healing of our land, and for the blessings of Almighty God.
1982, p. 97, 10-71, III, 17. That since there has been much illness in the families of our
pastors and staff during the last year, the Moderator be asked to suggest to the Church a day of
prayer and fasting and prayer in each quarter of the year for the health and strength of members
of the PCA, that we all may serve to His glory.
1984, p. 103,12-31, III, 13. That Personal Resolution #4 be answered in the affirmative as
amended, as follows:
Whereas the Scriptures instruct God's people to pray for revival (2 Chronicles 7:14); and
Whereas the Scriptures also contain many examples of God's divine visitation in revival; and

69

PCADIGEST
DAYS OF PRAYER AND FASnNG
Whereas God in times past has been pleased to visit His Covenant people with visitations of
Divine Revival;
Therefore be it resolved that the PCA General Assembly of 1984 meeting at Baton Rouge
encourage its churches to set aside at least one Sunday a month to claim the Promise of
our Covenant God to visit the Church of Christ with a mighty revival.
1993, p. 86, 21-38, III, 11. That May 4. 1994 be set aside as the Day of Prayer and Fasting
for World Evangelization and Revival as part of the National Day of Prayer. and that the
General Assembly unite in prayer that God would send many more laborers to His harvest field.
Adopted
DEACONS
(See also DIACONAL MINISTRIES; OFFICERS; PART V: POSmON PAPERS.
Diaconal Ministries. pp. 159-181; Mercy Ministry. Biblical Guidelines. pp. 414-428)
ADVISORY COUNCIlS

1981, p. 88, 9-35, III, 16. That the General Assembly encourage the Presbyteries to
sponsor the gathering of representative deacons into advisory councils for the purpose of
discovering better ways of carrying out the regular business of the church. and for discovering
better means for undertaking diaconal ministries among the needy around us.
EMERm

Voting
(See PART II: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION. BCO 24-9)
RECEIVING

1979, p. 103,7-41, III, 16. That Overture 10 from the Presbytery of the Evangel (p. 43) be
answered as follows:
a.
That the Book of Church Order 14-7 adopted by the Seventh General Assembly
clarifies the procedure for receiving Ruling Elders from a congregation that is coming
from another Presbyterian body. and
b.
That the procedure for receiving Deacons should be handled in a similar fashion by the
Session of the incoming church.
TRAINING MANUAL

1980, p. 72, 8-29, III, 8. That Churches be encouraged to utilize the "Diaconal Training
Manual". produced by the Committee for Christian Education and Publications as directed by
the Fifth General Assembly. which is scheduled for publication in early September. 1980.
WOMEN

(See PART II: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION. BCO 21-5.1984.12-53.
2A; 1984.12-73; PART m: JUDICIAL CASES. #23)

DEAF MINISfRY, A GUIDE FOR CHURCHFS
1985, p. 116, 13-49, III, 28. That Overture 37 (p. 52) be adopted. The GA requests the
MNA committee to identify resources and training materials on ministry to the deaf, assemble
these materials and make them available to local churches for implementing ministries in their
churches.

70

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
DEAF MINISTRY
1986. p. 113. 14-43. 111.1. That the Assembly receive the paper entitled "Deaf Ministry: A
Guide for Churches" which includes an annotated bibliography of materials for ministries with
the deaf as requested by the 13th GA and leave with CE/P the responsibility to "assemble these
materials and make them available to local churches." (Appendix J, Attachment A as amended
as follows) ...
1986. p. 353. AppendixJ. Attachment A.
DEAF MINISTRY: A GUIDE FOR CHURCHES
Mission to North America
INTRODUCTION
The Thirteenth General Assembly directed the Committee on Mission to North America
"to identify resources and training materials on ministry to the deaf, assemble these materials
and make them available to local churches for implementing ministries in their churches."
(M13GA, p. 116)
There are currently available a number of excellent programs for churches desiring to
begin a deaf ministry. There is no need at the present time for our denomination to write its
own "manual". Rather, the following guide identifies resources with an annotated bibliography,
and outlines the basic issues the church must address. This guide, then, is a door for the PCA
church who wishes to embark on this needed ministry.
From the General Assembly there are currently available two resources. One is this
guide you are reading. It can be ordered from Mission to North America. Also, you can order
W. Yount's book, Be Opened! An Introduction to Ministry With the Deaf, from the Christian
Education and Publication Committee. This is by far the best single reference book on the
subject. With these two items, the individual or group seeking to begin a deaf ministry will
have all the information necessary.
I.

OUTLINE FOR INTEGRATING DEAF PERSONS INTO CHURCH.
There are approximately 1,800,000 hearing impaired persons in the United States. The
deaf, like everyone else, are lost without Christ, yet there are many deaf persons who are
without a church in their community that is willing to interpret the gospel for them. The need is
even greater among the deaf who are from minority racial and language groups.
Many churches have responded to the need. There are 800 Southern Baptist churches
alone that provide some kind of ministry to the deaf. But many more churches must reach out
as well.
A.
Learn about the general needs of the deaf
1.
Come to understand the nature and extent of deafness. What kinds are there?
What are the causes?
2.
Learn the psychological/cultural effects of deafness on an individual. Get to
know the needs you are trying to meet
3.
Learn about the special educational and vocational needs of the deaf. Become
aware of the opposing approaches to communication and education known as
Oralism and Manualism. Within the manual approach, learn the differences
between American Sign Language and Signed Fnglish.
B.
Identify the specific needs of the deaf in your area
1.
Locate deaf persons in your community.
a.
There is no central, single way to locate the deaf, since the census and
other federal records do not register the deaf. Therefore it is important
to use several different methods to locate them.
b.
First, look at very local resources. Look in the phone book for any
clubs or associations for the deaf, parents of deaf children, or
interpreters for the deaf. Call the local department of social services,
department of vocational rehabilitation, or any referral agencies for
helping agencies.

71

PCADIGEST
DEAF MINISTRY
Secondly, contact all the national organizations listed below under
RESOURCES/Organization (See M14GA, pp. 355-356, Appendix J,
Attachment A, n, A; p. 114, 14-43, ill, I, RESOURCES). Ask for any
state or local chapters or groups which can give you the names and
addresses of hearing impaired persons in your area. Each organization
may be in contact with a different circle of deaf people in your area.
d.
Thirdly, there is at least one state school for the deaf in every state.
State departments of education can give you information on all schools
and instruction programs for hearing impaired children.
e.
Fourthly, once you have contacted a deaf person, be sure to ask for all
of his/her contacts with other deaf friends and acquaintances.
f.
Make your church accessible to the deaf persons in the community by
purchasing a TDD (Telecommunications Device for the Deaf) and
provide training in its use.
2.
Take a survey of the needs of the deaf.
a.
Visit. Let the deaf person and family know that the purpose of the visit
is to determine social and physical needs to learn how the church might
better meet those needs. Example of the kind of information to gather:
Name
Address and Phone
Age
Sex
Member of what church? Attends?
Christian?
Language used: oral or sign or both
Deafness: total or partial
Education level:
Employment
Deaf Organizations affiliated with:
Family background:
Parents are: deaf or hearing
Parents members of a church?
What could the church do to make you feel at home?
For deaf children, See Manual for Work With the Deaf (Southern
Baptist) for more help.
b.
Invite. See if the deaf person and family is willing to come to the
church. It is good to already have a ministry to offer (such as
interpreted preaching at regular services).
3.
Develop a relationship with local interpreters or interpreter referral agencies to
ensure proper coverage of services and events.
4.
Church bulletins, as well as any publicly circulated announcements of Church
services, should advertise that interpreter services may be arranged if requested,
giving the name of the contact person and date by which notification should be
made. This will preclude unnecessary contracting of interpreter services.
Choose a Program Option.
1.
A Bible Study. In the home or at the church. Weeknight, weekday, or SWlday
morning or evening.
2.
Interpreted Services. Provide interpreters at regular services. Be sure to enlist
the help and input of the deaf so that the ministry does not decay into a "one
man(woman)" show.
c.

C.

72

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
DIACONAL MINISTRIES
3.

4.

5.

Department ministry. A more extensive program when more deaf persons and
families become involved. It may include classes for different age groups of
hearing impaired persons, i.e. a mini-Sunday school department. For example,
parents of deaf children may have a special class while their children are in a
class as well. Many models are possible.
A sub-congregation, mission church, or autonomous church for the deaf.
a.
When a deaf ministry grows and there appear to be many more deaf
persons in the community to reach, it may be feasible to begin a deaf
congregation, with its own officers, budget, and even staff.
b.
The difficulties of deaf churches are two-fold. First, deaf persons often
do not make large salaries. The financial base is small. Secondly, the
children of deaf parents who are hearing need some of the resources of
a hearing church.
c.
The advantages. Deaf Christians can seldom move into leadership
positions in a hearing church. Deaf churches reach deaf persons more
effectively.
Note: Congregations should be aware that there is a substantial body of
opinion among professionals in this field, with regard to the question of
"subcongregations, mission churches, or autonomous churches" for the deaf,
arguing that such structures are harmful to the best interests of the deaf, and
their integration into the Body of Christ.
To promote integration of deaf persons into your congregations, offer Sign
Language classes for all interested persons. Any deaf members may assist in
the organization and instruction of the class.

DIACONAL MINISTRIES
(See also PART V: POSmON PAPERS, Diaconal Ministries, pp. 159-181; Mercy
Ministry, Biblical Guidelines, pp. 414-428)
BETHANY CHRISTIAN SERVICES

(See BETHANY CHRISTIAN SERVICES)
CIDLDREN

1974, p. 80, 2-104, II, B, 13. The Committee recommends that the General Assembly
receive as information the Following communication from the MUS Committee:
"MUS brings to the attention of the PCA the availability of the Palmer Home, Columbus,
Mississippi, for the care of orphans and dependents from broken homes."
ELDERLY

1975, p. 91, 3-81, 29. That the General Assembly be advised that a survey has indicated
that there appears to be no effort, at the present time, to establish, nor interest in, the
establishing of a home for the aged and children and that the Assembly requests individual
presbyteries to undertake the responsibility therefore.
1981, p. 91, 9-36, III, 12. That the CE/P begin the processes for developing and making
available diaconal literature and curriculum designed to help pastors and churches meet the
growing need of ministering to the elderly.
1981, p. 87, 9-35, III, 7. That Overture 2 from North Georgia Presbytery be answered in
the negative as being premature at this time, and that the Committee on Mission to the United
States study the need and feasibility of establishing a facility to care for the elderly of the PCA
and report to the Tenth General Assembly.

73

PCADIGEST
DIACONAL MINISTRIES
1982, p. 86, 10-66, III, 14, B.
That the PCA affirm that ministries to the elderly and infinn are important, and that
responsibility for their care rests with God (Deut.7:6-9), who will provide for His own,
looking
a.
First to each individual to provide for himself (all assets and income available
to provide for his and his spouse's care);
b.
Next, the sons and daughters should step in and provide what is necessary to
maintain their parents (Ex. 20:12; 1 Tim. 5:8);
,
c.
Next, the Church (local congregation/presbytery/General Assembly) should
assist its own;
d.
Finally, the civil government in "providing for the common good" should deal
with Christian needy in the same way it deals with non-christian needy
recognizing that such care is provided by common tax monies.
2.
That in order to assist individuals, families, the Church, and society to carry out their
respective responsibilities:
a.
PCA encourage the establishment of Christian Care Centers for the elderly and
infinn by local congregations, presbyteries, and groups of individuals.
Operation of these Christian Care Centers should be by groups of Christian
people at the local level. General Assembly's role would be to encourage these
works, providing appropriate assistance through its Committee on MUS.
b.
PCA encourage the formation of an association of Christian Care Centers in
accord with 2a above, commending this matter to the prayerful attention and
action of presbyteries, congregations and members. Should a Christian Care
Center accreditation agency be established, oversight would be through MUS.
1983, p. 130, 11-71. TE James M. Baird, Jr. made a special report on progress on a
retirement facility underway in Southern Florida, sponsored by PCA teaching and ruling elders.
Those interested in it or in possible similar developments were encouraged to contact RE
Robert Eberst, Executive Director, Genesis Life Care, Inc., 4111 SW 4th St., Miami, FL 33134
Presbyteries and Churches Encouraged to Consider Developing of Retirement Homes
and Conference Centers
1989, p. 132, 17-81, II, 2. That the 17th GA encourage churches and presbyteries
considering the development of specialized ministries such as retirement homes and conference
centers, to organize and operate them as separate corporations from the church, and to obtain
the advice of competent legal counsel throughout the process.
.Grounds:
(1)
A specialized ministry, such as a retirement home or a conference center, involves
many additional areas of exposure to liability that it warrants a separate corporation.
Although such an institution may legitimately be a part of the church's ministry, the
many risks involved could needlessly place the church's other assets at risk if the
retirement home were included in the church's corporation. Suits for such matters as
personal injury and financial improprieties would place the church's assets in jeopardy.
(2)
A separate corporation with a separate Board of Directors would not only mean more
legal protection for the church, a separate corporate structure would also mean that the
retirement home would have more effective oversight and preservation of its own assets
than if it were lumped in with all of the church's other ministries.

1.

MERCY MINISTRIES

(See PART V: POSmON PAPERS, Mercy Ministry, Biblical Guidelines, pp. 414-428)

74

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
DIACONAL MINISTRIES
MERCY REPORT

1986,p.53, 14-4,B.
Whereas, the Lord calls His Church to minister to the hungry (Mt. 25); and
Whereas, we feel the need for guidance for this ministry in a day when the world hunger
problem is painfully conspicuous;
Therefore, the Northeast Presbytery overtures the 13th General Assembly of the Presbyterian
Church in America (PCA) to instruct the Mission to the World (MTW) and Mission to
North America (MNA) Committees, and/or Covenant Seminary and Covenant College,
and/or a committee convened for this purpose alone, to produce a study paper with
practical guidelines for the instruction of PeA churches in ministry to the hungry.
We request that the study would address the following questions:
1.
What does the Lord require of His people and of His church in ministering to
the hungry?
2.
What do Old and New Testament practices suggest about what can be done at
the individual, group, and societal levels? To what degree are these practices
applicable today and in what possible re-encultrations?
3.
What practices, whether of other churches or secular agencies, have been
effective in the relief of the hungry?
4.
How can the PCA organize at the individual, particular church, and
denominational levels to implement effective ministries in this area?
REPORT

(See also PART V: rosmoN PAPERS, Diaconal Ministries, pp. 159-181)
1978, p. 85,6-75, III, 7. That the Committee for Christian Education and Publication do
the following during the coming year regarding diaconal ministries:
a.
That CFJP Committee further evaluate the operations of each of the NAPARC
Assembly level diaconal committees with a view toward establishing procedures in this
area that are compatible with and helpful to the particular needs and structure of the
PeA.
b.
That the CM Committee discuss with MUS and MTW the possibilities of coordination
of PCA resources in meeting diaconal needs in their areas of ministry.
c.
That the CFJP Committee develop instruction resources and aids for the training of
deacons, educating, and motivating members of the PCA to Christian response to these
in extraordinary need; the poor, the orphan, the widow, both within the church and in
the world around them.
d.
That the CFJP Committee emphasize the need for communication between local
churches, presbyteries and at the Assembly level regarding needs, resources, and
activities in the area of diaconal concerns.
e.
That the CE/P Committee appoint two delegates to the NAPARC Conference on
diaconal ministries to be held in October, 1978 in Chattanooga, Tennessee.
f.
That the CE/P Committee encourage Presbyteries of the PCA to organize committees
on diaconal concerns after the pattern of the Orthodox Presbyterian Church or the
Christian Reformed Church for meeting the needs with the Presbytery.
g.
The CE/P Committee encourage local church diaconates to take advantage of the
resources and examples of diaconal works mentioned in the "Report of the SubCommittee on Diaconal Ministries" (See Appendix D, p. 172) and consider the
possibilities for both broadening and deepening the diaconal ministries of their
particular churches.
h.
That the General Assembly, through the CM Committee, exhort more prayerful and
careful diligence in the election and ordination of qualified deacons by congregations.

75

PCADIGEST
DIACONAL MINISTRIES
1982, p. 65, 10-31, III, 15. That the responsibility for all diaconal ministries, except
overseas relief, be placed under the MUS Committee and that the CFJP Committee continue to
offer assistance in the area of training and materials needed for that ministry.

DIGFSf OF MINUTES
1980, p. 123, 8-103,111, 15. That Overture 21 be answered in the affirmative ... [That]
the General Assembly instruct the Stated Clerk to prepare a Digest of Assembly Actions taken
which provide guidance in the interpretation and application of our Book of Church Order, this
digest to be prepared in loose-leaf form, fully indexed and annotated as appropriate to its use, to
be updated annually.
Further, it is requested that the Stated Clerk be granted the services of an assistant for a
term of one man-month in the initial preparation of this digest, if, in his judgment, such
assistance is necessary.
A cost of $10,000 shall be included in the budget of the Committee on Administration
to pay for printing. Copies of the digest shall be sold through Christian Education &
Publication channels to recover costs of publication.
Grounds: such a digest will be very helpful.

DISASTER RELIEF
(See MISSION TO NORTH AMERICA, DISASTER REUEF & EMERGENCY AID; PART N:
BYLAWS, MANUALS AND GUIDELINES, Mission to North America, Policies for Disaster
Relief)

DISPENSATIONALISM
1978, p. 80, 6-63, II, A. Re Overture 7, Your Committee recommends that the General
Assembly affirm that Dispensationalism is basically incompatible with Covenant Theology.
Your Committee also recommends that the Christian Education Committee of the General
Assembly be instructed to prepare and make available for distribution a study documenting the
errors of modem Dispensationalism in the light of our doctrinal standards.

DISfINCTIVES OF THE PCA
1986, p. 187,14-85, III, 3. Overture 5 from Delmarva
This overture dealing with a document explaining the convictions and history of the PCA and
RPCES was accepted as amended by the Committee of Commissioners...
1986, p. 44, 14-4, B. Therefore be it resolved that the Thirteenth General Assembly direct
the Stated Clerk to prepare for publication a document explaining the convictions and history of
the PCA and the RPCES. The document shall be revised under the supervision of the Stated
Clerk to include history pertinent to the formation of the PCA and a reflection of PCA
governmental standards rather than those of the RPCES.
This document shall not represent an "official" position of the PCA but shall be
available as information. Upon completion of the revision, the Committee on Christian and
Publications shall publish the study when funds are available and make it available for sale.

DIVORCE AND CHURCH OFFICERS
(See OFFICERS, DIVORCED; PART m: JUDICIAL CASES, #51; PART V: POSmON
PAPERS, Qualifications for Officers of a Divorced Person, pp. 292-293)

76

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
ENDORSED AGENCIES
DIVORCE AND REMARRIAGE
(See PART ill: JUDICIAL CASES, #3, #51, #60; PART V: POSmON PAPERS, Divorce
and Remarriage, pp. 182-292; Qualifications for Officers of a Divorced Person, pp. 292-293)
DUE PROCESS FOR STUDENTS
COVENANT COLLEGE

(See COVENANT COLLEGE)
COVENANT THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY

(See COVENANT THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY)

EDUCATION
(See CE&P, COLLEGES; EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS; THEOLOGICAL SEMINARIES;
COVENANT COLLEGE; COVENANT THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY; MINISTER,
PREPARATION FOR THE MINISTRY, Candidacy, Uniform Curriculum; PART V: POSmON
PAPERS, Higher Education, pp. 390-397; Unifonn Curriculum, pp. 557-560; Guidelines for
Theological Education, pp. 561-565)
ELDER
(See also CONFIDENTIALITY; OFFICERS; SESSION)
EMERITUS, VOTING

(See PART IT: INTERPRETAnONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCO 24-9)
ORDINATION

(See PART ill: JUDICIAL CASES, #57)
ROTATION OF

1979. p. 105. 7-41. III. 27. That Resolution 13 concerning the rotation of Elders be
answered as follows:
This General Assembly believes that the previous General Assembly acted wisely when it
adopted Chapter 25 in the BCO without legislating on the specific matter of the rotation of
church officers.
ENDORSED AGENCIES
BETHANY CHRISTIAN SERVICES

(See also BETHANY CHRISTIAN SERVICES)
1986. p. 116. 14-43. III. 8b. That Bethany Christian Services be considered an endorsed
agency under this definition.
DEFlNITION

1986. p. 115. 14-43. III. 8a. That the Assembly adopt the meaning of "endorse" in
Attachment C, IT.C.I.a.
Meaning of "endorsement"
(1)
Endorsement includes accreditation. The agency is declared a valid and worthy
ministry. Endorsement goes beyond accreditation, however.

77

PCADIGEST
ENDORSED AGENCIES
(2)

Endorsement of an agency is a statement that the General Assembly will not duplicate
the agency's service and will seek to actively support it from its resources.
(a)
Individual donor level:
an endorsed agency shall have access to the
denomination's mailing list on a schedule approved by the Committee on
Administration which shall also approve the content of the mailing with the
concurrence of GA MNA.
(b)
Local church level: The GA MNA Committee shall formally recommend that
the endorsed agency receive support from local churches and presbyteries.
(c)
General Assembly Level: develop a plan of cooperation with the endorsed
agency to aid its expansion in areas of PCA strength.

EXECUTIVE COMMITTEES
1982. p. 68. 10-33. Ill. 3. That the Assembly direct the Sub-Committee on Judicial
Business to frame a bylaw to allow Committees, Boards and Agencies of the Assembly to use
Executive Committees, providing for a full review and approval of all actions of the Executive
Committees, and for the submission of Executive Committee minutes to the Committee of
Commissioners for review along with the minutes of the full Committee, Board or Agency.
Further, that if the Committee on Administration approves the proposed language of the SubCommittee, the proposal may be put into effect immediately pending final approval by the next
General Assembly.
All Committees, Boards or Agencies of the Assembly, upon receipt of the proposed
bylaw change for the Assembly, shall prepare amendments to their respective Manuals or
Bylaws to bring them into conformity with the Assembly's Bylaw proposal, if they desire to use
Executive Committees. In the meanwhile, Executive Committees should not be used by
Assembly Agencies.
1983. p. 93. 11-36. Ill. 14. That the General Assembly rescind the action of the Tenth
General Assembly regarding Executive Committees.
GROUNDS:
1.
The use of executive committees tends naturally to concentrate the decision making
process in the hands of a small number of people. This is not consistent with the
philosophy underlying the constitutional documents.
2.
Most of the Committees and Agencies. of the General Assembly have no apparent need
or desire to use executive committees. Of the few committees which have expressed a
possible desire to do so, none have demonstrated either a clear need, or that the benefits
outweigh the disadvantages.
(*The prior guidelines adopted regarding Joining and Receiving exempt Covenant
Theological Seminary and Covenant College from the effect of this recommendation.)

EXTRAORDINARY CLAUSE
(See MINISTER, PREPARATION FOR THE MINISTRY, Ordination, Extraordinary Clause;
PART ll: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCD 13-6, 1985, #56; BCD 21-4,
13-45, #44; PART m: JUDICIAL CASES, #11)

FAMILY CONFERENCES
(See CE&P)

FREEMASONRY
(See PART V: POSmON PAPERS, Freemasonry, pp. 300-377)

78

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
FUGITIVES FROM DISCIPLINE
(See PART V: POSmON PAPERS. NAPARC's Agreement on Transfer of Members. pp.
437-438)
FUND RAISING POLICY
1976. p. SO. 4-74.5•...That the Fourth General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in
America advise its members and churches as follows:
a.
The Lord has ordained that giving should be an act of worship and thus a means of
grace.
b.
God has revealed in His Word that His kingdom on earth is to be supported by the
cheerful. willing and loving tithes and sacrificial offerings of His children.
c.
Commercial activities such as suppers. bazaars. rummage sales. etc.• held primarily to
raise money are improper activities for the Church.
d.
Commercial activities designed primarily to provide a ministry such as a bookstore. are
proper Church activities.
e.
Neither the Church. nor any organization of the Church should sponsor such benefit
promotions which have as a primary purpose raising money for the support of the
Lord's work.
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
AcnONS. BINDING CHARACTER OF
(See also PART II: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION. BCO 15-1, 1985.

13-45.47. #4)
1979. p. Ill. 7-48. The Stated Clerk in response to this report. set forth the following
points regarding the binding character of the different kinds of actions of the Assembly:
1.
Coostitutional changes made by the Assembly. in accord with Chapter 27 of the Book of
Church Order are binding upon the whole Church.
2.
Judicial cases. when adjudicated by the Assembly. are binding [on the parties]
regarding the matter thus settled.
3.
Review and Control of Presbyteries and of Committees are binding upon the particular
Presbytery or Committees.
4.
Adoption of reports on particular subjects give the consensus of an Assembly's opinion
on that subject. Such opinions by our Assembly serve as a guideline or pious advice to
our constituency on the SUbject. As such. they should be reported. studied. and taken
seriously. They are not binding on the consciences of sessions or individuals who
believe on Biblical grounds that another position is preferable.
1987. (See PART ill: JUDICIAL CASES. #58. Explanatory Opinion)
ARRANGEMENTS COMMI1TEE

1974. p. 76. 2-100. II. B. 2a. That requests for speaking time by representatives of groups
not of the church be answered in the negative. but that representatives of such groups be
introduced at such time that other distinguished guests are introduced to the Assembly.
1975. p. 76. 3-63. 6. That the composition of the Assembly Arrangements Committee be as
follows: a chainnan selected by the host church. A representative from each of the four
pennanent committees. the Coordinator of the Committee on Administration. and the Stated
Clerk of the General Assembly.
1975. p. 76. 3-63. 7. That the Assembly approve the following guidelines for displays at
the Assembly:
Subject to space available. priorities for exhtbitors will be as follows:

79

PCADIGEST
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
a.

Committees of the Presbyterian Church in America, including agencies or
institutions with which they have formally, through their minutes, established a
working relationship.
b.
Agencies or institutions with which the General Assembly, through its minutes
has established a working relationship.
c.
Agencies and institutions which in the opinion of the Committee on
Arrangements have objectives, policies, or programs in general conformity with
those of the Presbyterian Church in America.
d.
A disclaimer statement should be printed in the General Assembly Docket
distributed to all Commissioners, stated in effect that permission granted to
place an exhibit does not mean the Presbyterian Church in America necessarily
fully endorses the exhibitor's product, services, or objectives.
These guidelines are to serve as the ordinary guidelines. IT the Committee on
Administration feels that an exception must be made, it has the authority to do
so, and is to report such actions and the reasons to the next Assembly.
1978, p. 99, 6-87, 17. That Resolution 2 (6-19) on future Assembly arrangements be
answered in the affirmative.
Whereas, it is incumbent upon us to be faithful stewards of money which God entrusts to us;
and
Whereas, many colleges actively seek to schedule large conferences as a means of utilizing their
facilities during the summer months; and
Whereas, the use of such college facilities proves both practical and economical;
Therefore, be it resolved that the Sixth General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in
America encourage the Permanent Committee on Administration to seek out such
facilities and the support of local churches in hosting those meetings of the General
Assembly after 1980.
1980, p. 122, 8-103, III, 10. That presbyteries and not the four major committees be
responsible for worship services at future General Assemblies on a regular rotating basis.
1982, p. 70, 10-33, III, 29. That the Assembly Arrangements Committee, and particularly
those who share the responsibility of preparing the Assembly's Docket, be instructed to give
special attention to a rearrangement of the 1983 Docket in order to allow doctrine, polity and
judicial matters, as well as budgets, to be handled earlier on the docket, and that the Committee
of Commissioners on Judicial Business meet an extra day early, if necessary.
•.
1983, p. 85, 11-30, III, 42. That the General Assembly authorize a registration fee for the
General Assembly to be held in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, on June 22, 1984, not exceeding
$45.00.
1983, p. 81, 11-30, III, 20. That Overture 19 from the Presbytery of Eastern Carolina, be
answered in the negative and that the COA be permitted to arrange the time of the General
Assembly, and that for planning purposes, the normal time for the General Assembly is to be
considered to be the third full week of June.
1985, p. 87, 13-30, III, 3. That the Women's Advisory Sub-Committee, a permanent subcommittee of CF/P, assist local assembly arrangement committees in coordinating the spiritual
activities for the women attending General Assembly.
1985, p. 136, 13-73, III, 2. That as a rule of the Assembly no private business solicitation
is authorized at the Assembly without prior approval of the Assembly Arrangements
Committee.
1989, p. 132, 17-81, 11,4. That in place of the present funding method for GA meetings,
which requires host presbyteries to underwrite up to 25% of the costs, beginning with the 1992
GA that COA will recommend that the planning and operating costs of GA will be borne by all
of the churches and all the teaching elders not in PeA pastorates.

80

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
1989, p. 82, 17-47, III. 15. (Also adopted at 17-81, II, 9, p. 132.) That the General
Assembly concur with Overture 17 from Westminster Presbytery ... "that those responsible for
scheduling the Pre-Assembly program at subsequent General Assemblies include seminars that
deal directly with Christian Education and schooling.
1993, p. 181,21-64, III, 30a. That the AC give preference to Presbyterian and Reformed
Adopted as Amended
organizations to exhibit at General Assembly.

Manual
1986, p. 171, 14-74, III, 14. That the Manual for General Assembly Arrangements,
attachment D, p. 129, be approved with the following amendment: That the word "net" be
inserted after "Assembly" and before "costs," line one, and after the word "proposed" and
before "costs," line two of ill Financial Arrangements and that the following section be added
under II Location of Assemblies
II D. The cost of items included in C above shall be submitted to a previous General Assembly.

Volunteer Pages
1982, p. 70, 10-33, III, 30. That the expenses of pages at this General Assembly for food
and lodging be paid by the Committee on Administration for those who are unable to pay their
own way, to be funded from the four Committees.
ASSISTANT CLERKS

(See RECORDING CLERKS)
AunJORITY OVER OTHER COURTS

(See PART V: POSmON PAPERS, PCA Structure, pp. 516-541)
BUDGETS
(See FINANCIAL POUCIES, Budgets)
CANCEL MEETING

1988, p. 176, 16-77, III, 23. That the advice of the Committee on Judicial Business to the
Stated Clerk be ratified.
Advice requested as to whether the Stated Clerk or the Committee on Administration acting as a
Board of Directors may cancel a meeting of the General Assembly.
ADVICE:
1.
The BCO provides in 14-2 for the Assembly to meet annually.
No provision is made for the cancellation of the Assembly meeting.
2.
3.
In relation to the question of the place and meeting arrangements, this is under the
authority of the COA.
COMMITTEES OF COMMISSIONERS

1981, p. 156,9-80, 111,16. That Resolution 1 be answered in the affinnative.
Whereas, the committees of commissioners are charged with the responsibility of reviewing the
activities of the permanent committees, and boards of the Assembly; and,
Whereas, the General Assembly from time to time directs these committees and boards to carry
out certain projects, ideas, and goals; and
Whereas, the committees of commissioners may not always be able to detennine from the
minutes that these assignments have been concluded;

81

PCADIGEST
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Therefore, be it resolved, that the minutes of the first meeting of each year following the
General Assembly of the pennanent committees and boards list the forthcoming year's
work for the committee or board (Assembly .usigned responsibilities, projected ideas
and goals, citing the General Assembly minutes by page and paragraph); and that the
minutes of the last meeting before the next General Assembly include the same work
list, showing what has been completed and what work was not accomplished including
reasons why.
1986. p. 137. 14-57.111. 10. That all policies, curriculum revisions, and documents referred
to in the Minutes of the Board of Trustees and Executive Committee [of Covenant Theological
Seminary] be appended to their Minutes and supplied to the' Committee of Commissioners
through the Stated Clerk's Office.
1988. p. 127. 16-37.111.4. That the General Assembly direct the secretary of the Board of
Trustees to comrmmicate any Board of Trustees or Executive Committees minutes of meetings
prior to General Assembly of each year to the Committee of Commissioners on Covenant
Theological Seminary.
1991. p. 95. 19-45. III. 18. That the Committee on Mission to the World be instructed to
provide its Committee of Commissioners with all written documents to which reference is made
in their minutes, which shall include the reports of the Coordinator and all Directors.
1993. p. 183.21-70. Constitutional Inquiry
TE James Meek's constitutional inquiry, that the procedure for adopting and/or amending the
report as a whole be clarified. This was referred to the Committee on Constitutional Business to
report back to the 22nd General Assembly.
COMMl'ITEES, PERMANENT

Cooperation
1978. p. 98. 6-87. III. 6. That Resolution 3 which originated in the Committee of
Commissioners on Administration (6-44) .be amended and answered in the affinnative as
follows:
Whereas, in accomplishing its work the Committee of Commissioners on Administration
detected tensions and what appears to be competition between some of the Pennanent
Committees of the Assembly, over promotion of program, solicitation of f\Ulds, and
levels of budgets; and
Whereas, it is also noted that in the current year some Committees are being funded better than
others. Your Committee feels these things ought not to be: "The work of the Church is
one work"; and
Whereas, youe Convnittee is aware that the very structure of the Assembly is designed to
prevent centralization of power, and fully agrees with this principle; your Committee
recognizes that unless all areas of the work of the church move ahead in harmony, the
work and witness of the church will become out of balance and thereby will be injured.
For example, growth in World Missions depends upon growth in new and existing
churches from which missionary candidates and their support are drawn. Local
churches require Christian training materials and information for growth through
winning new, and disciplining present, members in Christ. 1 Corinthians 12 reminds us
that though our tasks may differ we are one, and that each differing task or function is
an essential part of this branch of our Lord's Body.

82

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Therefore, it is against this background and out of prayerful concern for the future of our church
and a commitment to see her a mighty soul-winning instrwnent, that we recommend
that the Assembly direct the four Permanent Committees and their Sub-Committees not
to lose the visioo of over-all work of the church so necessary to her welfare; to direct
the staff to maintain such vision even when pursuing the objectives of their particular
areas of responsibility, and to so cooduct their promotional and ftmd-raising efforts as
well as the development of their budgets in a manner that will also promote and
consider the needs and responsibilities of the other Committees as charged to them by
the Assembly; to the end that we will move forward in unity and harmony under our
Lord's banner to be used mightily in His work.
1983. p. 83. 11-30. III. 35. 2. That the COA with the addition of the chairmen of the
pennanent committees (CFJP, MNA & MTW) be directed to prepare and present a plan to the
Twelfth General Assembly to cooperate more effectively in the support of the General
Assembly's directives and purposes and to provide for the financing for the total program of the
Assembly.

Coordinators
1983. p. 83. 11-30. III. 35. 4. That the coordinators of the permanent committees be urged
to meet at least quarterly for prayer.

Insurance
1981. p. 114.9-55. III. 13. That the General Assembly direct its Committees and Boards
automatically to adjust the compensation packages for Coordinators, the Business
Administrator, and the employees of the Church whose compensation package is set by the
General Assembly, for any group insurance rate increases.

Meetinp
1975. p. 90. 3-77. 15. That the General Assembly declare that all Permanent Committee
meetings may be attended by any member of the PCA and that such members shall be afforded
a place on the Committee's docket when a request to do so is received by the Committee at least
ten days before the Committee meeting, and that the dates of stated Committee meetings must
be published at least 30 days prior to the meeting.
1976. p. 85.4-80.15. That, in conformity with the instructions contained in Resolution No.
15 of the Third General Assembly, the General Assembly remind each of the Committees of the
necessity of publishing dates of all committee meetings at least 30 days in advance of such
meetings and that such publication be in "Continuing .... " or in the proposed denominational
magazine.
1988. p. 139. 16-58.4. That during this year between the 16th and 17th General Assembly
the chief administrative officers of the Program Committees and Agencies, at their own
expense, may attend any meeting of COA, shall be entitled to the privilege of the floor, but shall
not have a vote and must be excluded when an executive session is called.
Minutes·
(See also COMMITTEES OF COMMISSIONERS)
1975. p. 91. 3-81. 24. That the minutes of all permanent committees along with the
guidelines for review be sent to all appropriate committee of commissioners members prior to
the General Assembly.
1986. p. 175. 14-74. III. 62. That the General Assembly direct the committees and
agencies to propose and develop standards for the evaluation of their coordinators and agency
heads and the fact that an evaluation has been conducted be reported annually as a part of their
, minutes.

83

PCADIGEST
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
1991, p. 167, 19-67, III, 12. Be it resolved that the Nineteenth General Assembly instruct

its committees and agencies promptly to furnish their committee approved minutes (other than
executive session) to any member of the PeA in good standing who so requests, at his expense.
Social Security
1978, p. 98, 6-87, III, 2. That any ministers subject to Social Security tax, employed by a
committee of the Assembly, should have his salary and allowances package arranged so that he
is self-employed for the purpose of Social Security.

Staff Moving on to field
1975, p. 90, 3-81, 20. That the General Assembly remind the Committee for Christian
Education and Publications and all the other pennanent committees that no program staff should
move on to the field until they have been approved by the General Assembly Theological
Examining Committee.
Travel Expenses
1989, p. 133, 17-81, II, 10. Overture 21 from the Presbytery of the Southwest (M15GA,
1987,p.36, 15-3,B;M16GA,1988,p.65, 16-3, C)
Whereas Members of the Presbytery are expected to fulfill their responsibilities to that body,
and
Whereas the PCA is a National Church and should have broad representation from Presbyteries
throughout the country, and
Whereas the Pennanent Committees are servants of the entire Church and need to be
represented to the various Presbyteries,
Therefore the Presbytery of the Southwest overtures the 15th General Assembly meeting in
Grand Rapids, June 1987 to direct its Committees and Agencies to allow time for and
provide the expenses for travel and lodging necessary for both Teaching and Ruling
Elders who are employees of said Committees and Agencies to attend their respective
Presbyteries at least once each calendar year.
Recommendation: That the 17th GA approve Overture 21 from the Presbytery of the Southwest
Adopted
and refer it to the appropriate committees and agencies to implement.
CONFUCI' OF INTERESt'

1993, p. 177,21-64, 111,8. That in response to the 20th General Assembly instructions that
the Administrative Committee study the appropriateness of committees, boards of agencies, or
employees thereof being involved in outside commercial interest promoting or soliciting funds
for benefit plans in competition with denominationally authorized plans, that the 21st General
Assembly recommend that full consideration and application of the principles included in the
Conflict of Interest Report, Section VI:3, be observed by all committees, boards of agencies and
employees thereof.
Adopted
ERROR PERCEIVED

(See PART IT: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCO 15-1, 1985, 13-45,
47, '4; BCO 45, 1984, 12-53, '58)
FINANCIAL POUCIFS

Accounting Method
1983, p. 81, 11-30, III, 19. That the Presbyterian Church in America change its accounting
method to an accrual basis from a cash basis for its four permanent committees effective
December 31, 1983.

84

I

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Askings
1975, p. 30, 3-11. Overture 11
1.
That whereas the principal of freedom of conscience of the individual Christian to give
where he feels the Lord is calling him to give is recognized,
2.
And whereas three of our Assembly's committees have received far less than they had
anticipated for the vital operation of their work,
3.
And whereas it is recognized that the work of Missioo to the World justly deserves all
funds it has received and more;
[Therefore the General Assembly:]
1.
Commend[s] people for their giving to world missions;
Urgers] that they increase their giving to world missions but at the same time also that
2.
the individuals and congregations of the PeA prayerfully consider the needs and
responsibilities of the Committee on Administration, the Committee on Christian
Education and Publications, the Committee OIl Mission to the US, and without taking
anything away from the Committee OIl Mission to the World, yet increase their giving
so that these three other committees may receive sufficient funds on which to operate
efficiently.
1978, p. 98, 6-87, III, 6. That the following procedure regarding the Assembly budgets be
followed:
a.
That within 30 days after the Assembly the Stewardship Sub-Committee make a
suggested allocation of the overall budget adopted by the General Assembly and submit
their askings to each Presbytery.
b.
That within 30 days after receipt of such askings, each Presbytery will make a
suggested allocation and submit such asking to each local session and request a pledge
from such session.
c.
That within 30 days after receipt of such askings, each local session will communicate
to its Presbytery what portion of such askings that local church will pledge to
contribute.
d.
That the Stewardship Sub-Committee will communicate this infonnation to each
Coordinator and Committee Chairman and will during the year continue to encourage
the giving by the local churches.
e.
That the Stewardship Sub-Committee select and convene an Advisory Committee of
church leaders representing churches of the Assembly to suggest and recommend the
best method for presenting to the whole Church the total program of the church and the
systematic funding thereof.
1979, p. 137, 7-87, III, 5. That recommendation No.5, (p. 157), be adopted as follows:
that immediately following this Assembly, the Stewardship Sub-Committee be requested to
infonn all presbyteries and local sessions of the overall budget adopted by the General
Assembly, and request the presbyteries to interpret to the local session the "minimum" per
capita response "requested" of all coogregations in order to meet this challenge.
1983, p. 82, 11-30, III, 35. That Personal Resolution 7 (p. 61) be answered in the
affirmative as amended as follows:
Whereas, it appears that our permanent committees are operating as separate entities similar to
"para-church" agencies;
Whereas, that situation appears to generate harmful conflict among the committees as they
strive toward their individual committee's respective goals;

85

PCADIGEST
GENERAL ASSEMBLY

Whereas, the financial condition rooted in this situation has resulted in disaster: i.e., the need to
borrow monies to cover expenses in arrears, the inability to pay $3,800 to the Stated
Clerk for "out-of-pocket" expenses, the unpaid accumulation of $11,500.00 in travel
vouchers for various committee meetings, the unpaid attorney's fee amounting to
$4,000, the initiating of small claim's court proceedings by a firm in Brevard, NC, for a
$168.00 past-due accoWlt, a large printing bill several months past due, and other
various past-due accounts.
Whereas, only 216 congregations of the 805 in the PCA currently support the COA;
Whereas, the coordinators of the Assembly's permanent Committees and agencies are servants
of the Assembly and are to be committed to the aims and goals of the Assembly,
working as a team, mutually submissive to one another in the Lord,
Therefore, Be It Resolved,
1)
That the Coordinators of the permanent committees be directed to strongly
encourage all of the churches to meet the askings of all of the committees of the
General Assembly (BCD 14-1-4).
2)
That the COA with the addition of the chairmen of the permanent committees
(CFJP, MNA, & MTW) be directed to prepare and present a plan to the Twelfth
General Assembly to cooperate more effectively in the support of the General
Assembly'S directives and purposes and to provide for the financing for the
total program of the Assembly.
1985, 13-33, III, p. 91, 4. That the General Assembly include the Ridge Haven expense
budget into the General Assembly'S "askings".
Rationale: When the General Assembly authorized its Conference Center Committee to
purchase the land and start developing a conference center for the denomination, the Committee
on Mission to the World was the only one of the Assembly's four major committees which was
receiving close to 100% of its budget. Our Committees on Mission to the United States (now
MNA), Christian Education and Publications, and Administration were falling short of
receiving the funds they needed to carry out the work the Assembly had committed them to do.
Under these circumstances the Ridge Haven Board volunteered to raise its own funds for both
operating expenses and development. During the last five years the Church has done much
better in ftmding the three committees which were being seriously handicapped at the time
Ridge Haven was started. We believe the time has come to have Ridge Haven's operating
budget included in General Assembly's "askings" and to have the Conference Center receive its
proportionate share of undesignated assembly benevolence funds.
1986, p. 137, 14-57, III, 9. That the GA strongly urge the churches to meet COA's annual
askings per commWlicant member.
Reasons:
(a)
CTS is the seminary of the GA; GA is therefore responsible before God for its
seminary's fInancial support.
(b)
GA's fmancial support has grown in the past year, but still falls far short of the
approved askings.
1993, p. 180, 21-64, III, 26a. That the General Assembly in adopting these budgets is
pledging its support of said budgets, therefore General Assembly should strongly encourage all
members of the General Assembly to fully support these budgets.
Adopted
Auditing
1973, p. 55, 1-72, 16. That administrative expenses of the 1974 meeting of the General
Assembly be borne by the General Assembly, with each committee bearing its proportionate
share, according to the budget.
1973, p. 55, 1-72, 17. That all accOWlts be audited on an annual basis, and that the auditing
reports be presented to the Committee on Administration for evaluation and report to the
General Assembly, and that hooding be provided for all treasurers.

86

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
1975. p. 77. 3-65. 12. That the cost of auditing all Assembly accounts be pro-rated to each
committee on the basis of each committee's percentage of the total budget.
1983. p. 105. 11-43. III. 28. That the permanent committees and boards of agencies be
instructed to ensure that their audits are reconciled with their statements of actual expenditures
as contained in their documentation submitted in support of proposed budgets.
1986. p. 118.14-43. III. 26. (See recommendation 10, AppendixJ, p. 353) Recommend to
the GA that it "Receive MNA Supplemental Report Attachment I (p. 378) and approve it as a
standard format whereby the Reformed University Ministries of the Committee on Mission to
North America can report its ministries, staff and finances. The Assembly's auditors believed
that a simple report of financial activity to the Assembly was all that was necessary, rather than
a separate (from MNA) audited statement. The GA committee in the area of campus ministries
acts as an administrative channel for the funds for the presbyteries and provide an audited report
of the funds to the presbyteries involved.
1987. p. 189. 15-92. III. 18. That the 15th GA instruct agencies not included in the
denominational corporation (Le. IAR, PCA Foundation, Ridge Haven, Covenant College,
Covenant Theological Seminary, and Investor's Fund) to amend their bylaws, if necessary, to
require an annual audit of the financial affairs of the agency by an auditing firm designated by
the GA on recommendation by the agency.

Borrowing
1974. p. 71. 2-94. II. A. That the Minutes of the Board of Directors be approved.
1974. p. 98. 1-20. Resolution Authorizing Committees to Borrow Money and Sign Notes
Not to Exceed a Maximum Total of $50,000
At a meeting of the Board of Director's of the National Presbyterian Church held at the
First Presbyterian Church in the City of Montgomery, Alabama, on April 16, 1974, pursuant to
due notice, at which a quorum of the Board was present, on motion, duly seconded, the
following resolutions were unanimously adopted:
Resolved, that the following Permanent Committees of the National Presbyterian
Church (A Corporation): The Committee on Administration; The Committee on Christian
Education and Publications; The Committee on Mission to the United States and The
Committee on Mission to the World; be hereby authorized, upon proper resolution duly adopted
by the said Committee, in the name of and for the account of this Corporation, or in the name of
and for the account of the said Committee, which is a constitutionally appointed Committee of
this Corporation, and on such terms as the said Committee may deem proper, to borrow from a
bank or other lending agency as designated by the said Committee any sum or sums of money,
not to exceed a maximum total of $50,000; to sign, execute and endorse such documents as may
be necessary or required by said Bank or lending institution to evidence such indebtedness; to
discount or rediscount with said Bank or lending institution and of the bills receivable held by
this Corporation through the said Committee; to apply for and obtain from said Bank or lending
institution, letters of credit, and to sign and execute agreements to secure said Bank or lending
institution in connection therewith; to pledge and/or mortgage any moneys on deposit or any
moneys otherwise in possession of said Bank or lending institution, and/or any bonds, stocks,
bills receivable or other property of this Corporation to secure the payment of the indebtedness,
liability or obligation of this Corporation to said Bank or lending institution, whether due or to
become due and whether existing or hereafter incurred, howsoever arising; to withdraw and/or
substitute any property of this Corporation held at any time by said Bank or lending institution,
and to sign and execute trust receipts for the withdrawal of same when required; and generally
to do and perform any and all instruments necessary or required by the said Bank or lending
institution for its protection in its dealings with this Corporation.

87

PCADIGEST
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Resolved, that the said Bank or lending institution be furnished with a certified copy of
these resolutions and be hereby authorized to deal with the Committee or its duly appointed
representatives herein-above named under said authority unless and until it be expressly notified
in writing to the contrary by this Corporatioo, and shall in writing acknowledge receipt of such
notificatioo; and said Bank shall at all times be protected in recognizing as such officers the
persons duly certified by the Committees named in a certificate signed by any officer of this
Corporation.
Budgets
(See also COMPENSATION FOR COORDINATORS AND DIRECTORS)
1975, p. 76, 3-60. The following recommendations were adopted:
2.
That the General Assembly adopt the following policy regarding budgets: that the
budget adopted for a particular year by the General Assembly be the spending limit for
each committee.
3.
That the General Assembly adopt as policy that each committee be allowed to rearrange
its budget within the total approved each year with the exception of designated gifts and
the compensation of the Stated Oerk and the four Committees' Coordinators.
That the General Assembly determine each year the percentages to be used in
4.
distributing undesignated gifts during the forthcoming budget year and that this
determination be based on the experience during the period of the current year prior to
the meeting of the Assembly.
1979. (Re "Committed" and "Growth" Budget, see STEWARDSHIP COMMITrEE,
DUTIES, 1979,7-22,1 and 2)
1980, p. 109,8-80, III, 12. That the Eighth General Assembly direct its Sub-committee on
Stewardship Ministries to establish a uniform budget format to be used by all General Assembly

committees.
1982, p. 118, 10-90, III, 20. That the system of presenting the budgets according to a
unified budget format be abandoned in favor of a return to presenting detailed budgets.
1983, p. 105,11-43, III, 29. That the permanent committees be instructed to use a standard
form in their presentations of budgets for approval and that, where feasible, agencies use the
format.
1984, p. 191, 12-90, III, 62. That the salaries of all Directors, etc., of agencies and
institutions be reported in their budgets as a specific item.
1985, p. 122, 13-58, III, 6. That all General Assembly Committee and Agency budgets be
automatically adjusted to compensate for increases in health insurance premiums not anticipated
in those budgets and that such increases be absorbed at no income loss to the individuals
affected. Further, that PCA churches be encouraged to do the same.
[Note: Reaffirmed in succeeding years.]
1987, p. 189, 15-91, III, 17. That the 15th GA direct all committees, boards and agencies
to develop actual financial budgets based not on a maximum amount to spend but on a realistic
amount expected to be spent; that GA approve spending of 5% above a realistic budget.
1989, p. 135, 17-81, III, 28. That the 17th GA instruct the Committees and Agencies to
provide to the COA staff the information for income sources and income projections to be
included in the Handbook of the General Assembly as a standard operating procedure.

88

I

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
1990, p. 111, 18-40, III, A, 27. That the 18th General Assembly reaffinn the policy
adopted at the 11 th General Assembly on deficit spending: "That the Eleventh General
Assembly direct its pennanent committees and agencies that expenses are not to exceed income.
The expression 'not to exceed income' is to be tmderstood to mean the summation of total
income and total expenses for the fiscal year of the committee or agency, and that the use of a
line of credit or other short-tenn cash arrangement tools are not precluded. In the event that a
committee's or agency's income does not meet requirements of conducting business, obligations
are to be paid in the following order - (a) salary commitments, (b) bills due to other
organizations and businesses, (c) other expenditures authorized by the General Assembly.

Adopted
1992, p. 135-6, 20-63, VI, 34.
Whereas the budgets of some of the PCA committees and agencies contain explanatory notes,
while others do not; and
Whereas some committees and agencies justify the increases in their budgets while others do
not; and
Whereas proposed increases and planned expenditures of the budgets do not appear to be
realistic for some committees and agencies; and
Whereas assumptions used for the escalation of salaries, benefits, and other expenses vary by
committee and agency; and
Whereas the AC has had difficulty exercising its responsibilities delineated in RAO 4-11 due to
lack of uniformity and commonality in budgeting procedures for the committees and
agencies;
Therefore be it resolved, that the 20th General Assembly direct the AC to recommend
budgeting standards for the preparation and evaluation of all committee and agency
budgets, and that such recommendations be reported to the 21st General Assembly; and
Be it further resolved, that the proposed budgeting stan~ include at least these minimum
provisions:
a)
reasonable grotmds for increases in the ASKINGS from one year to the next;
b)
that adequate correlatioo must exist between the proposed ASKINGS and the
ASKINGS received in the last fiscal year; and
c)
documentation that substantiates the ftmding included in the proposed budget
for any new ministry or activity.
1993, p. 178,21·64, III, 21. Comments on MTW Budget:
1.
Administrative cost increase of $430,000 or 17.6% over 1993 seems excessive in view
of:
a.
Projected increase in missionaries to 511 is 49 less than projection for 1993.
b.
The 1994 budget level of $2,872,578 represents an increase of 95% over a six
year period or more than 3 times the rate of increase in the number of
missionaries.
2.
There is concern that discrepancies exist between MTW's published list of services
covered by administrative costs, e.g., "Since You Asked" -- brochure and those reported
in the MTW budget [Appendix K, p. 436] as being covered by administrative costs.
3.
The 6% increase in salary and benefits for MTW staff and at least one increase of 12%
seem excessive vis-a-vis other agencies, and in view of declining undesignated support
of MTW from the churches.
4.
IMPACT should include a historical record of 2 year missiooaries as well as its
projected number of two-year missionaries for budget year under consideration [see
Appendix C, Attachment 4, p. 335ff].
1993, p. 179, 21-64, III, 21a. That Mission to the World report in its "Criteria for
Preparation of Proposed Budget" (see Appendix C, Attachment 4, p. 325), the Missionary Units
(husbandlwife, singles) in addition to the total number of missionaries and that these units be
listed in two categories:

89

PCADIGEST
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
1.
2.

Units fully administered by Mission to the World.
Units in Cooperative Agreements and administered partially by Mission to the World.

Adopted
1993, p. 179, 21-64, III, 23a. Direct the Board of Directors of Ridge Haven to report all
projected income and expenses in future budgets.
Adopted
1993, p. 179,21-64, III, 24. That automatic salary increases not be used to project future
budgets of any of our committees, boards. or agencies, beginning in fiscal 1995.
Adopted
1993, p. 179, 21-64, III, 25. That General Assembly grant the AC an extension until the
23rd General Assembly to comply with the directive of the 20th General Assembly to produce
standards for the preparation and evaluation of all committee, board, and agency budgets which
were to have been presented for consideration by this 21st General Assembly and that the
General Assembly direct all committees, boards, and agencies to cooperate with the production
of these standards.
Adopted
Comment: The Committee of Commissioners on AC notes that the AC did not comply with the
directives of the 20th General Assembly, but it appears that it would have been difficult
if not impossible to do so. Moreover, the Committee of Commissioners agrees that the
recommendations yet to be produced by the National Financial Task Force will be
helpful in preparing Standards. However, the Committee of Commissioners believes
that the AC should have reported to this 21st General Assembly its failure to comply,
with an explanation. and should have requested from the General Assembly the
necessary extension.
1993, p. 180,21-64, 111,26. That the General Assembly direct all committees. boards. and
agencies to include in their budgets:
1.
Reasonable grounds for increase in askings from one year to the next.
2.
Documentation that substantiates the funding included in the proposed budget for any
new ministry or activity.
3.
Co1umns be added to show % of change from previous year as well as change in dollar
amounts.
4.
Full disclosure of income and expenses.
5.
Add a subtotal of total expenses showing cash outlays before depreciation.
6.
That the staff of the Administrative Committee and the staffs of the various agencies
and committees jointly develop definitions and methodologies in detennining the
proportions of expenses which are "administrative" vis a vis "program".
Further, that AC monitor this compliance and report to the General Assembly any noncompliance of the General Assembly directives.
Adopted as amended
Checks
1974, p. 71, 2-94, II, A. The committee recommends that the Board of Directors by
resolution require the 4 Pennanent Committees to have two signatures on all checks written
against Corporation and Committee bank accounts.

Expenses

Committeemen
1985, p. 137, 13-73, III, 22. That COA pennanent committee chainnen who are not elected
commissioners have their expenses to the GA borne by the General Assembly. The
committeeman nearest to the location of the General Assembly who is needed for a quorum, but
is not an elected commissioner, will also have his expenses to the committee meeting paid by
the GA. (This policy applies to the following committees: Theological Examining.
Nominating, Interchurch, Review & Contro1.)

90

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
GENERAL ASSEMBLY

Committees
1983, p. 83, 11-30, III, 35, 3. That the Eleventh General Assembly direct its permanent
committees and agencies that expenses are not to exceed income. The expression "not to
exceed income is to be understood to mean the summation of total income and total expenses
for the fiscal year of the committee or agency, and that the use of a line of credit or other short
term cash arrangement tools are not precluded. In the event that a committee's or agency's
income does not meet requirements of conducting business, obligations are to be paid in the
following order:
a)
Salary commitments,
b)
Bills due to other organizations and businesses, and
c)
Other expenditures authorized by the Assembly
1990, p. Ill, 18-40, III, 27. The 18th Assembly reaffirmed the policy adopted by the 11th
General Assembly.
Legal
1975, p. 67, 3-49, C. That each of the four permanent committees be authorized and
requested to include provisions for legal expenses when preparing their budgets.

Moderator
1974, p. 83, 2-106, IV, 18. That all travel expenses incurred by the moderator on
denominational business be paid by the denomination, and that such expenses incurred at the
request of permanent committees, churches, presbyteries or other agencies be borne by that
agency.

Ministers and Ruling Elders to attend Courts
1977, p. 94, 5-92, 111,2. That the Assembly approve the action of paying the expenses of
retired ministers to General Assembly as within the discretionary authority of the Trustees;
1977, p. 138, Appendix C, II, A. Since the Assembly indicated a desire to fund the
expenses, the Trustees felt that they should proceed to pay these expenses, if funds could be
located. In 1m the expenses will be borne by interest earned on the fund for Ministerial
Relief. Future years expenses may be provided for in the same manner, depending on the
availability of funds to meet this need.
1983, p. 100,11-36, III, 47. Overture 20
Whereas, BCD 10-6 states that the "Expenses of Ministers and Ruling Elders in their attendance
on the courts shall be defrayed by the bodies which they respectively represent, " and
Whereas, ministers do not officially represent the local church (JJeo 13-2, 14-2), and
Whereas, the Tenth General Assembly did not answer the question "Does BCD 10-6 intend that
Presbyteries defray the expense of their Teaching Elder members upon their attendance
of General Assembly1", and
Whereas, it has been the practice of local churches to pay the expenses of their ministers to
attend General Assembly annually,
Therefore, be it resolved that the Sub-committee on Judicial Business study this matter and
bring in a report to the Twelfth General Assembly.
[Note: The amendment to BCD 10-6 proposed by Judicial Business Committee was not
adopted by the Assembly. This question has not tx;en dealt with since.]

Nominating Committee
(See NOMINATING COMMITTEE, FUNDING)

91

PCADIGEST
GENERAL ASSEMBLY

Presbytery Records Committee
A.

1991. p. 125. 19-61. 111.16. That expenses of committees of GA be funded as follows:
Presbytery Records Committee be reimbursed as necessary for food and lodging for the
two or three days prior to GA from GA registratioo fees. Further, that members of
Presbytery Records Committee, who are not commissioners, be reimbursed for travel,
food and lodging for only as long as they are needed to complete the work. [Note: This
policy to be reviewed after 3 years.]

Retired Ministers
1977. p. 94. 5-92, III, 2. That the Assembly approve the action of paying the expenses of
retired ministers to General Assembly as within the discretionary authority of the Trustees;
Grounds: (p. 139, n, A.)
1978, p. 101, 6-87, III, 28. Overture 28 ... [That] the General Assembly to instruct the
Committee on Administration to cease any activities designed to fund the expenses of retired
ministers attending future General Assemblies and be it further resolved that the separate
Presbyteries of the Presbyterian Church in America be informed that retired ministers are the
Presbytery's individual responsibility as to their attendance at General Assembly.
1990. p. 112. 18-40.111. A, 31. That the registration fees for the Honorably Retired and for
the Elder Emeritus representing a church be 1/3 the approved General Assembly registration
amount for the 1991 and 1992 GA.
Adopted
1993, p. 172.21-64, 111,1. That the 21st General Assembly continue the policy of reduced
registration fees for Honorably Retired and Elder Emeritus commissioners and that the policy
be reviewed again after the 23rd General Assembly.
Adopted

Studies & Stud] Committees
1981. p. 156,9-80. III, 18. That all General Assembly-authorized studies conducted by the
Committee on Administration that are related to common concerns of the permanent
committees and that require the expenditure of funds, shall be funded by those committees on
an equal basis.
1987, p. 191, 15-92, III, 29. That the General Assembly approve and provide a budget for
each new study or ad hoc committee to be administered by COA.

Volunteer Pages
1982. p. 70, 10-33, III, 30. That the expenses of pages at this General Assembly for food
and lodging be paid by the Committee on Administration for those who are unable to pay their
own way, to be funded from the four Committees.
Fiscal Year
1973, p. 55, 1-72, 15. That the General Assembly establish the policy that the fiscal year of
the church be from January I-December 31.
1983, p. 84. 11-30, III, 40. That the General Assembly's Bylaws be amended (Article 5,
Section 1) that the accounting period of the General Assembly be changed from a calendar year
to a fiscal year, July 1- June 30, commencing July 1, 1984. GROUNDS:
1.
The accounting finn of Kent, Nobles and Martin recommends change to July I-J\U1e 30
Fiscal Year.
2.
Two of the General Assembly agencies, both educational institutions, are already on the
July I-June 30 Fiscal year. Their educational purpose and affiliations make a change of
the F"J.SCal Year impossible. Therefore, having all GA committees and agencies uniform
with the educational agencies is easier than asking the College and Seminary to
conform to a calendar year accounting period. To change to a uniform accounting
period will simplify our GA reporting and will provide a uniform budget period of all
GA causes for local church officers.

92

I

ASSEMBLY ACflONS

f
GENERAL ASSEMBLY

3.

\

The General Assembly, meeting in June each year can:
a.
Amend the current budget to cover current year actual expenses before the
books are closed.
b.
Be more realistic in setting a new budget since the new fiscal year will begin on
July 1. Presently there is a delay of six months before the new budget begins.
c.
Set a projected budget beginning one year later on July 1, for planning
purposes.
4.
Auditing will be done in the summer, reporting to committees for their meetings and
included in the annual minutes. In the first year 1983 to JWle 30 of 1984, an eighteen
month period. We would only have one audit
5.
Regarding General Assembly askings:
a.
At the conclusion of each General Assembly local congregations will know the
exact amount of the askings' beginning on July 1 of the current year.
b.
Sessions and Diaconates will be able to realistically project the askings a year
in advance based upon the new projected budget which will be presented for
the following year.
c.
Committees and Agencies will be able to immediately seek fWlding for their
newly approved current budgets.
1989. p. 135. 17-81, 111,31. That the 17th GA change the fiscal year of the Committees
and Agencies of General Assembly (except Covenant College and Covenant Theological
Seminary) from midyear to a calendar year. This is to take effect by allowing a July 1, 1990 to
December 31,1991 budget period.
GroWlds:
(1)
Committees and agencies would be in synchronization with most PeA churches in their
fiscal year.
(2)
Also Committees and Agencies would be in synchronization with individuals and many
fOWldations who plan their giving along calendar year for fiscal purposes.
(3)
Committees and Agencies would also be in synchronization with our presbyteries.
(4)
The calendar year as fiscal year fits better with the stewardship season of most of our
churches, which is in the Fall.
(5)
It will be easier to report statistics of membership, and finances and to make appropriate
studies when these are in synchronization.
(6)
This recommendation comes with the endorsement of the Committees and Agencies.
Gifts

Conditio1UJ/
1974, p. 71,2-94, II, A. That the following policy of conditional gifts be adopted instead of
Paragraph 1-23 of the Board of Director's Minutes.
It is resolved that the Board of Directors establish a matter of policy that before any conditional
gifts are received in behalf of the National Presbyterian Church, the conditions shall be put into
writing and submitted to the Board of Directors for approval. It is further resolved that as a
matter of policy the Board of Directors does not favor receiving gifts that have any conditions
attached thereto, Wlless after ten (10) years if the purposes of the contributor have not been
accomplished, or cannot be accomplished the General Assembly may upon recommendation of
the Board of Directors remove such conditions by a 2/3 vote of registered commissioners.

Desig1lllted
1978, p. 98, 6-87, III, 14. That the General Assembly instruct its committees that
designated monies are to be disbursed according to the wishes of the donor provided that the
gifts are for PCA work or work approved by any Church Court.

93

PCADIGEST
GENERAL ASSEMBLY

Restricted
1983, p. 113, 11-48, III, 8. That the General Assembly direct the PCA Foundation to
establish procedures for dispersing funds which were received as restricted but undesignated
funds and the donor of such funds dies before a designation for disbursement is given by that
donor.
Grounds: The representative of the PCA Foundation advised that the above contingency had
not been addressed and a policy established. As certain substantial gifts had been made to the
Foundation as restricted but undesignated gifts, this matter needs to be addressed.
1984, p. 114, 12-45, III, 1. At the directive of the Eleventh General Assembly, the PCA
Foundation Board has duly considered the question of the disposition of restricted but
undesignated funds in the event of the death of the donor. It is our recommendation that a
standard agreement be prepared which would cover this possibility. The agreement would state
that the donor could make the designation in his will.

Un4esig1Ulted
[Note: Various methods of disbursing undesignated funds have been approved by different
Assemblies.]
1973, p. 56, 1-76. "...by authorizing the treasurer of the Committee on Administration,
namely the Business Administrator, to receive all undesignated benevolence gifts, and that he
be directed to dispense the money to the four committees on the percentages established by the
Budget of the General Assembly, without any form of equalization." [Note: The percentage is
set by each General Assembly.] (See 1975, p. 76,3-60,4)
1973, p. 58, 1-77, 8. That undesignated giving be encouraged for distribution to the four
General Assembly committees.
1981, p. 116,9-56, III, 10. That the fWlding of the PCA Foundation and the Stewardship
Committee be through the Committee on Administration; and that to forestall a financial crisis
for that Committee the following plan be adopted:
a.
All undesignated General Assembly income be shared equally by all permanent
committees with 25% allotted to each committee.
1982, p. 117,10-90, III, 17. That undesignated General Assembly income be shared by the
four Pennanent Committees according to the following formula:
Administration 25%
CEJP
25%
MTW
25%
MUS
25%
1983, p. 80, 11-30, III, 14. That the following plan for funding the Committee on
Administration be adopted:
Whereas, the COA is now responsible for fWlding the COA, PCA FOWldation, and the
Stewardship Ministries, and
Whereas, the COA is responsible for its own funding by asking for "designated giving" and has
been sharing in the "undesignated giving" of the General Assembly, it is recommended
that the following plan be adopted:
1.
All undesignated giving" to the General Assembly will be shared as follows
when the COA is operating at 90% to 100% of budget (sum of "designated" and
"undesignated" giving).
a.
Messenger is to receive funds for postage and printing first.
b.
Balance of "undesignated giving" is to be divided 25% to each of the
four permanent committees with the COA not sharing beyond the sums
needed to meet 100% of the budget for the calendar (budget) year.
In the event that the COA drops below 90% of its budgeted needs in any month,
2.
the "undesignated giving" will be divided as follows:
a.
Messenger--same as La. above.

94

I

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS

I

i

I

GENERAL ASSEMBLY
The COA will receive a share sufficient (if available) to fund it at the
90% level for the month, and
c.
The balance of "undesignated giving" will then be handled as 1.b.
above.
[Note: Reaffinned in succeeding years.]
1984, p. ISO, 12-67, III, 9. That the Assembly return, as sooo as it is practical, to any
equitable division of funds given to the work of the Assembly without more particular
designations, or declare that all undesignated gifts to the Assembly will be used only for
administrative purposes.
b.

Support, Committees
1973, p. 45, 1-66, 5. That the General Assembly affirm as its own position the action of the
Advisory Convention of the Continuing Presbyterian Church (Minutes of Advisory Convention,
page 24) saying that "each Committee shall be responsible to raise the financial support for its
own wodc and distribute its fund through its own treasurers elected by each committee" and that
the Assembly further affirm as its own position the action of the Organizing Committee of the
Continuing Presbyterian Church (Minutes of September 7-8, 1973, meeting of Organizing
Committee, page 9) saying in effect that no Committee of the Assembly is precluded by any act
of the Assembly from having direct access to all of the churches of this denomination by direct
mail.
1983, p. 104, 11-43, III, 8. That all churches review carefully their giving to PCA causes in
comparison with their giving to non-PCA benevolences, and that all churches be encouraged to
increase their support of PCA needs.
GOALS

(See MNA, GOAlS OF THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH IN AMERICA; PART V: POSmON
PAPERS, Mission and Purpose of the PCA, pp. 429-436)
LOGO, SEAlS, AND BANNERS

1973, p. 55, 1-72, 21. That the matter of a Church emblem or seal be referred to the
Christian Education and Publication Committee for study.
1983, p. 81, 11-30, III, 18. In response to Resolution #4 carried over from the Tenth
General Assembly, the following two recommendations are made:
A.
That the General Assembly direct the COA to develop a distinctive emblem for seals,
banners, and logo in accord with the following principles:
1.
Continue the direction set by the First General Assembly to have a uniform and
distinctive designation for the denomination, its committees, agencies, and
churches.
2.
Express the unity of the denomination in public relations, correspondence, road
signs, etc.
3.
Respect the confessional position that no representation of deity shall be made.
4.
Permit the concurrent use of a specific logo for the permanent committees and
agencies.
1986, p. 43,14-4, B. Overture 21: From Westminster Presbytery
Be it resolved that the Fourteenth General Assembly not accept the ~ Logo presented to
the Thirteenth General Assembly.
1986, p. 171, 14-74, 111,13. That Overture 21 be approved. Tabled
1989, p. 138, 17-81, III, 38. Overture 37 from Delmarva Presbytery, "Development of a
PCALogo"
Whereas the First General Assembly received and approved a cormmmication regarding a
unified emblem or logo for the PCA, and referred the issue to a committee; and

95

PCADIGEST
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Whereas the 11th General Assembly again approved the concept of a logo and approved the
following guidelines concerning a logo:
"That the General Assembly direct the COA to develop a distinctive emblem for seals,
banners, and logo in accord with the following principles:
1.
Continue the direction set by the First General Assembly to have a uniform and
distinctive designation for the denomination, its committees, agencies, and
churches.
2.
Express the unity of the denomination in public relations, correspondence, road
signs, etc.
3.
Respect the confessional position that no representation of deity shall be made.
4.
Permit the concurrent use of a specific logo for the permanent committees and
agencies." and
Whereas the Fourteenth General Assembly, meeting in Philadelphia, did not accept a particular
proposal for a logo, but did not reject the concept of a unified logo; and
Whereas there has apparently been no further progress on a logo;
Therefore, be it resolved that the Committee on Administration is instructed to again take up the
matter of preparing and proposing a unified logo for the PCA and report to each
General Assembly on this project until such a logo is adopted; and that the principles
approved by the 14th General Assembly are reaffirmed and are to be followed, and that
the following guidelines are to instruct (but not bind) the Committee in carrying out of
this assignment:
1.
The PCA Messenger is instructed by this Assembly to publish an article at the
earliest convenient opportunity outlining the need of the PCA for such a logo,
the adopted guidelines of the 14th General Assembly, and invite submissions
for this logo to COA by 1/1/90.
2.
At the first meeting of the COA after the first of the year the committee is to
consider these applications. It may (1) adopt one of these submissions for
submission to the General Assembly as its recommendation or (2) may seek
outside professional assistance in obtaining a proposed logo.
The committee is instructed and authorized to fulfill any legal requirements concerning a logo.
Recommendation: That Overture 37 be approved as funding is available, and that COA is
instructed to make this a priority since this request started with the first GA and has not yet been
completed.
1992, p. 135, 20-63, VI, 29. That the 20th General Assembly relieve the AC of its
responsibility to develop a PCA logo.
1993, p. 157,21-56, 111,22. "PCA Logo Resolution" directed at AC.
Answered in the negative, on the ground that the Twentieth General Assembly relieved the
Adopted
Administrative Committee of this responsibility.
MEMORIAL SERVICE FOR TEACHING ELDERS

1986, p. 171, 14-74, 111,12. That Overture 19 be approved
1986, p. 42, 14-4, B. Overture 19: From Westminster Presbytery
Therefore be it resolved that the General Assembly cease its annual memorial service for
Teaching Elders.
MINUTES

(See also PUBUCAnON OF ASSEMBLY ACflONS)
1982, p. 69, 10-33, III, 12. That hereafter, the Minutes of the General Assembly not be
distributed free of charge to ministers, clerks of sessions, etc., but be sold at prices set by the
office of the Stated Clerk. Rationale: prices may fluctuate.

96

I

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
GENERAL ASSEMBLY

I

MODERATOR'S CONFERENCES

1
\
I

1

1975, p. 78, 3-65, 17. That the Assembly adopt Resolution 4 as follows:
Be it resolved, not as a mandatory directive, but as a recommendation expressing the sense of
the Assembly as follows:
1.
That the Moderator call and chair two Moderator's Conferences each year,
preferably one in November and one in May.
2.
That the purpose of the conference shall be to discuss the issues facing the
programs of the Church.
3.
That the Conferees shall be:
(a)
The Moderator and the immediate past Moderator
(b)
The Stated Clerk
(c)
One Ruling and One Teaching Elder from each of the 4 Committees,
one of whom shall be the chairman of his Committee.
(d)
The 4 Coordinators
(e)
The chairman of the Sub-Committee on Stewardship and the Director
of Stewardship Ministries.
(f)
Any special invitee of the Moderator.
4.
That the cost of these conferences be paid as follows:
(a)
From the Moderator's Fund for the moderators and any special invitee.
(b)
From the respective Committees for its members.
5.
That each conference convene at noon on a Friday and adjourn at noon on a
Saturday.
6.
That the time of the call of the Fall conference be set and announced by the
Moderator at the General Assembly, and that the time for the Spring
Conference be set and announced at the Fall Conference. (See paragraph 3-78)
[Note: These conferences were held for several years. None have been conducted since 1980.]
OFFICES

(See PCA OFFICE BUILDING)
PUBUCATION OF ASSEMBLY ACTIONS

1979, p. 139,7-90,24. That because of the need for congregations to understand as quickly
and as fully as possible what the Seventh General Assembly has accomplished, and, because of
the difficulty even commissioners have in accurately assimilating, recalling and documenting
major decisions of the Assembly as they report to congregations, and as sessions attempt to
follow the lead of the General Assembly, and, because realistically, the Minutes of the General
Assembly are largely not effective in communicating to the churches the Assembly's actions
due to their detailed treatment, therefore, the information be presented in the earliest issue of the
Messenger rather than directly by the Stated Clerk.
PURPOSE, STATEMENT OF

(See PART V: POSITION PAPERS, Message to All Churches, pp. 7-14; Mission and
Pu~e of the PCA, pp. 429-436)

RECONSIDERATION OF ACI'ION

(See PART II: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCO 15-1, 1985, 13-45,
47, #4; BCO 45, 1984, 12-53,58)

97

PCADIGEST
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
RECORDING CLERKS

1979, p. 139, 7-90, 19. That in view of the misunderstanding which had occurred despite
the action of the Sixth General Assembly, the expenses of the assistant clerks, who have not
been paid by their local churches or presbyteries, be paid by the Assembly this year, but no
more in the future, and that the presbyteries be billed for those expenses.
1979, p. 139, 7-90, 20. That the Assembly pay the expenses of its recording clerks each
year (two at present).
RELATIONSHIP OF AGENCIES TO GENERAL ASSEMBLY

1993, p. 181,21-64, III, 31b. That the General Assembly instruct the PCA Foundation that
the Foundation is under the authority of General Assembly both ecclesiastically and as touching
civil matters.
Adopted
1993, p. 181,21-64, III, 31e. That should the AC Board of Directors desire that the Stated
Clerk's paper on "The Relationship of Agencies to the General Assembly" be accorded the
status of a position paper, the AC should present the paper to the General Assembly for
adoption.
Adopted
REORGANIZATION PLAN

(See PART V: POSmON PAPERS, PCA Structure, pp. 516-541)
REPORTS

1974, p. 82, 2-106, IV, 10. That the General Assembly instruct all Committees to report
monthly, in a uniform manner, financial infonnation to the Committee on Administration.
1983, p. 80, 11-30, III, 12. That the General Assembly request each PCA church to
participate in the completion of a congregational profile questionnaire and census fonn entitled
"Session's Annual Survey and Statistical Report for the Office the General Assembly, PCA."
RULES FOR ASSEMBLY OPERATIONS

[Note: The current rules are printed in the back of the Minutes of the General Assembly every
year. See ~o STANDING RULES OF THE FIRST GENERAL ASSEMBLY.]
RULING ELDER PARTICIPATION

1976, p. 83, 4-79, J, 6. That the General Assembly recognize the serious lack of
participation on the floor of the General Assembly, which lack is distressing and inconsistent
with our commitment to the parity of ruling and teaching elders, and further that the General
Assembly instruct the Permanent Committee on Administration to bring to the next General
Assembly positive recommendations as to how ruling elders can better be infonned and
encouraged to participate in all the courts of the Church, and further, that the committee
continue to address this problem as part of its permanent function.
STANDING RULES OF THE FIRST GENERAL ASSEMBLY

1973, p. 26, 1-15. Judge Leon Hendrick, Chairman of the Judicial Business Committee
presented the following temporary standing rules, which were adopted by the General
Assembly:
1.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in these Temporary Rules, ROBERTS'S
RULES OF ORDER shall be the standard in parliamentary procedures.
2.
Each recommendation in each report of each provisional Committee must be read,
considered and acted upon separately.
(a)
The chairman moves the adoption.
(b)
The Moderator asks: Is there objection or question?
(c)
Hearing no objection or question, the Moderator states: It is adopted.

98

I

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS

}

(

HEROIC MEASURES

f

3.

I

\
4.

Procedure in debating a question:
(a)
The chainnan reporting. or his designate. may answer questions concerning the
report addressed to him through the Moderator.
(b)
Only the chainnan shall have an opportunity to make the final statement in
debate.
(c)
No commissioner may speak on the same question more than once until all
desiring to speak have done so. Each speaker shall be limited to a maximum of
five minutes.
(d)
When any main motion has been debated for one hour. the Moderator shall
inquire of the court whether it wishes to place some definite limit upon further
debate.
(e)
Debate shall be free and open. with equal time being given to proponents and
opponents insofar as possible.
All motions shall be presented in writing and read before being voted upon.

STRUCI'URE OF mE peA
(See RELATIONSHIP OF AGENCIES TO GENERAL ASSEMBLY; PART V: POSmON PAPERS.

PCA Structure. pp. 516-541)

GRANDFATHER CLAUSE
(See MINISTER. PREPARATION FOR TIlE MINISTRY.
INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION. BCD 24-9)

Internship;

PART

IT:

GREAT COMMISSION PUBLICATIONS
(SeeCE&P)

HERESY
(See PART IT: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION. BCD 46-5.1985.13-45.
43)

HERMENEUTICS
(See INTERCHURCH RELATIONS. NAPARC. 1980.8-43. IV. 4)

HEROIC MEASURES
(See also PART V: POSmON PAPERS. Heroic Measures. pp. 378-389)
1984, p. 42, 12-10, II, B. Overture 37: From the Presbytery of Illiana
Therefore. be it resolved that the illiana Presbytery overture the Twelfth General Assembly to
establish a committee to study such questions as "What constitutes heroic measures?".
"At what point do modem medical approaches attempt to usurp the life/death authority
of God?". "When may Christians properly refuse heroic attempts to prolong life?". and
to provide helpful Scriptural insight and direction for families finding themselves in this
dilemma.

99

PCADIGEST

HISI'ORICAL CENTER
(See also PART V: POSITION PAPERS, Archives, pp. 73-71)
CnuRCH HISTORIES

1975, p. 91, 3-81, 22. That the General Assembly encourage each local session to compile
and maintain a history of the church and that the Stated aerie of the General Assembly be
directed to supervise the collection and deposition of such material at the direction of the
Assembly.
COMMITTEES AND AGENCIES

1979, p. 138,7-85, III, 6. That all committees and agencies of the Assembly be directed to
preserve all of their records, until such time as a suitable place of depository for historical
records is provided by the Assembly.
1982, p. 69, 10-33, III, 8. That the Stated Clerk be directed to visit the offices of each of
the Assembly's Boards and Agencies to determine how each is preserving its historical
materials, and to report to the next Assembly as to the status of the historical records of the
various agencies of the Assembly.
LOCATION

1982, p. 62, 10-24, III, 9. That Covenant Seminary be the repository for RPCES presbytery
and synod records and other historical materials until such time as permanent arrangements can
be made.
1984, p. 184, 12-90, III, 14. That Covenant Seminary become the temporary site of the
PCA archives.
RECORDS POLICY

1984, p. 185, 12-90, III, 20. That pending development and adoption of a comprehensive
records policy for all the interests of the General Assembly, that the General Assembly adopt
the following brief Principles of Records Management and Archival Responsibility:
1.
In questions of whether or not a given record or group of records is still needed for
operational use and operational reference, barring other specific General Assembly
action the Assembly's Operational Agency creating and using the records is the final
judge.
2.
In questions of whether or not a given record or group of records is still needed for
historical use and historical reference, barring other specific General Assembly action
the Assembly's Historical Agency is the final judge.
3.
In questions of the definition of what constitute records, to whom they belong, and who
may destroy them, the following provisions shall apply:
a.
"Records" includes ALL of these underlined categories:
Correspondence: all correspondence both outgoing and incoming.
Minutes: of the Committee or Agency; of its committees; and of its
subdivisions; and any papers relating to them.
Reports: issued by the Committee or Agency, or by its subdivisions, or by its
staff.
Financial: ledgers and books of final entry; master files; audits; records of
annuities, bequests, endowments, property, etc.
(Requisitions, cancelled
checks, and other ephemeris seldom need to be retained in bulle beyond current
reference use requirements EXCEPT that block samples should be randomly
retained for the use of future students of the history of the systems.)
Personnel: dossiers and personnel records of administrative and staff members
and of employees. These should be marked "Personnel - Restricted."

100

I

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS

\

I

HOMOSEXUALITY

!

I
1

b.

c.

d.

e.

Publications: two copies of every publication issued by the agency. This
includes also house organs such as bulletins. newsletters. press releases. etc.
Artifacts: portraits. sculpture or other objects related to individuals or activities
connected with the agency or the Church; items of furniture decoration and
equipment used in the operatioos of the agency and representative of its
personnel. times or operations.
(The term "Records") includes all communications and forms.
examples of which would be hand- or machine-produced manuscripts. scripts.
prints. films. negatives (photographs. slides. filmstrips. motion pictures.
microforms). audio recordings (phono discs. tapes. wires). electronic processing
data media (cards. tapes. discs).
Records retention periods for records of administrative. legal or fiscal value
should be determined by those administrators responsible for their creation and
current use--with legal counsel if necessary.
Although Church agency records may have been created by an individual. those
records do not belong to him individually. but are a part of the creative end
product of the agency of which he is a member. and therefore are the property
of the Church. Neither the individual nor the agency has the right or the
authority to remove or destroy them.
Ordinarily. all records. files and other archival material will be placed in the
Archives after five years. In unusual circumstances the Archivist with the
Stated Clerk may allow specific parts of materials to be left out of the General
Assembly Archives beyond five years. After 10 years. all files. records and
other archival material will be placed in the General Assembly Archives.
Records retention periods for records of administrative. legal or fiscal value
should be determined by those administrators responsible for their creation and
current use--with legal counsel if necessary.
The General Assembly's historical agency is the Office of the Stated Clerk.
This office has the ultimate responsibility for determining the possible
historical value of the Church's records and has final authority as to whether
any item or group of items may be destroyed even though they are no longer
classified by agency officials or staff or employees as current or permanent for
agency use. including administrative. legal or financial.

HOLY SPIRIT. GIFrS
(See SPIRITUAL GIFTS; PART Ill: JUDICIAL CASES. #61; PART V: POSmON
PAPERS. Spiritual Gifts. pp. 543-551)

HOMOSEXUALITY
(See also PART m: JUDICIAL CASES. #62; PART V: POSmON PAPERS.
Homosexuality. pp. 398-401)
1993. p. 160.21·56. III. 26. "Commendation of the People of Colorado"
Whereas. the citizens of the State of Colorado have passed amendment #2 to the Constitution of
the State of Colorado that prohibits the granting of minority status to homosexuals;
and ...
Therefore Be It Resolved that the 21st General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in
America commend the people of the State of Colorado for their courage in support of
amendment #2 by sending a letter from our Stated Clerk of the General Assembly to the
Governor of that state; and

101

PCADIGEST
HOMOSEXUALITY
By separate and appropriate actions, urge local churches throughout the PCA to take practical
steps to support PCA churches in Colorado as they seek to advance Christ's Kingdom
while their governing authorities enable them to live in all godliness and holiness. (1
Timothy 2:2)

HUMANISM
(See PART V: POSmON PAPERS, Humanism, pp. 402-403)

HYMNALS
1975, p. 112, 3-89, 8. Regarding item 3 calling for a Reformed Psalter, the Committee
recommends that the Assembly recommend the use of hymnbooks that include a good selection
of the Psalms and hymns, that are true to the Word, set to music suitable for the worship of God,
such as, the Trinity Hymnal of the Orthodox Presbyterian Church, and the Psalter Hymnal of
the Christian Reformed Church.
1975, p. 89, 3-75, 10. That the General Assembly encourage the use in the churches of the
Trinity Hymnal published by the Great Commission Publications. (Unanimous) The Assembly
amended this to add The Book of Psalms for Singing (Reformed Presbyterian Church of North
America) and Bible Songs (Associate Reformed Presbyterian Church) to the list of psalters and
hymnals.

INCORPORATION
BYLAWS

(See PART IV: BYLAWS, MANUALS AND GUIDELINES)
[Note: The text of the Bylaws may be found printed at the end of the Book of Church Order.]
CERTlF1CATE OF INCORPORATION

(See also PART IV: BYLAWS, MANUALS AND GUIDELINES)
1973, p. 36, 1-52. Judge Hendrick announced that the Church has been incorporated in the
State of Delaware, according to the directive of the Advisory Convention. He delivered the
Certificate of Incorporation to the Stated Clerk of the Assembly.
1980, p. 118, 8-88, III, 10. That the following changes be made in the Certificate of
Incorporation of the PCA:
Add the word "civil" between "The" and "activities" in the first line of Article Sixth. Delete the
following sentence found at the end of the first paragraph of Article Sixth of the Certificate of
Incorporation: "The board of directors is expressly authorized to make, alter or repeal the
Bylaws of this corporation. "
[Note: The Certificate of Incorporation may be found printed at the end of the Book of Church
Order.]
PRESBYTERIFS

1973, p. 36, 1-53. The following recommendations of the Judicial Business Committee
were adopted:
We recommend that each Presbytery be incorporated in the State of Delaware with as
many as fifteen incorporators, if desired, or as few as three, and that said incorporators be duly
selected by each Presbytery.
PROPRIETY OF

(See PART V: POSmON PAPERS, Church/State, II, pp. 118-122)

102

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
INSURANCE, ANNUITIES AND RELIEF
INSURANCE
CASUALTY AND UABIUTY

1983, p. 82, 11-30, III, 34. The COA has been studying various proposals involving mass
merchandising property and casualty insurance plans which may be available to PCA churches,
through local agents, at considerable savings. Pennission is requested to continue the study and
to offer a desirable program to local churches if possible.
FIRE AND UABIUTY

1975, p. 65, 3-47, 2. The Committee recommends that each church secure Fire and
Liability Insurance protection from local sources as there appears to be very little interest in a
group approach.

INSURANCE, ANNUITIES AND RELIEF
[Note: As the insurance and retirement plans are constantly updated they are not included in
this publication but can be obtained from the Committee on Insurance, Annuities and Relief.]
ANNUITY PROGRAM

1973, p. 49, 1-67, 11. We recommend that full time General Assembly administrative
personnel be full participants in the Annuity Program and collateral benefits on the same basis
as ministers.
1973, p. 49, 1-67, 12. We recommend that an annuity program for Lay Employees be
established to provide a retirement annuity based on a contribution of 9% of the employee's
salary, 6% from the employer and 3% from the employee. Contributions to this program can be
received as of January 1, 1974 in line with our other recommendations above.
1976, p. 87, 4-83, II, D, 4. Motion adopted unanimously that the Board of Trustees
encourage Presbyteries to cover the cost of the dues for a minister who desires to be in the
Annuity program and when the church he is serving is financially unable to meet that cost
1983, p. 80, 11-30, III, 13. That the Coordinator of the Administration Committee be
authorized and directed to execute on behalf of the Presbyterian Church in America, A
Corporation, a voluntary tax-sheltered annuity plan and the money purchase pension plan as
approved by the Tenth General Assembly (10-71, Article 3, Par.12) (XV.5, p. 97).
BYLAWS

(See PART IV: BYLAWS, MANUALS AND GUIDELINES)
1984, p. 113, 12-44, III, 13. That the General Assembly approve the by-laws adopted by
the Trustees
CHRISTMAS OFFERING

(See MINISTERIAL RELIEF)
DAY OF PRAYER AND FASTING

(See DAYS OF PRAYER AND FASTING, 1982, 10-71, 17)
DENTAL PLAN

1983, p. 159, 11-87, III, 17. That the Trustees be granted authority to offer to all eligible
PCA ministers and lay employees, on an optional basis, a PCA group dental plan, provided that
sufficient interest exists and that a sufficient number of participants can be enrolled in such a
plan.

103

PCADIGEST
INSURANCE, ANNUITIES AND RELIEF
DEVELOPMENT OF COMMITTEE

1973, p. 49, 1-67, 2. We recommend that a Board of Trustees be elected by this General
Assembly to serve as Trustees for the Insurance and Annuity Fund. We recommend that six
persons be elected as trustees at this Assembly to serve; two of them for three years, two for
four years, two for five years, and that two additional trustees be elected at each of our next
General Assemblies providing a total Board of ten trustees for the Fund
The following were elected to the Board of Trustees ...
1974, p. 82, 2-106, IV, 8. That the responsibilities of the Insurance Subcommittee be
placed in the hands of the trustees for the insurance and annuity fund after the 1975 General
Assembly. Until then, the Insurance Subcommittee will continue to evaluate our major medical
insurance and other insurance needs.
1974, p. 82, 2-106, IV, 9. That the Trustees of the Insurance and Annuity Fund be
authorized and directed to report directly to the General Assembly.
1981, p. 112, 9-55, III, 9. The Trustees of the Insurance and Annuity Funds of the
Presbyterian Church in America contemplate the possibility of separating the operations of its
office from that of the Committee of Administration and the employment of a director or
administrator to manage the functions and responsibilities assigned and delegated to the
Trustees combined with the potential for future growth of the Church give an urgency to the
matters that required the supplementary recommendations following these words of
explanation. Further, an examination of the Church documents governing the operations of
General Assembly created organizations reveals that adequate documentation of the role of the
Trustees is not set out. Further, there does not appear in the Church documents any of the
language set out in the Trust instruments governing the Trustees. Such trust instruments are
binding on both the Trustees and the General Assembly. These instruments provide for proper
accounting of all transactions to the General Assembly and provide that anyone or all of the
Trustees can be removed by the General Assembly with or without cause. We believe that the
provisions of the Trust instruments, the relevant civil law, and the judicious selection of
Trustees by the General Assembly make appropriate the delegation of authority and
responsibility contemplated in the language of the following recommendations:
c.
The Trustees shall, unless specifically directed otherwise by the General Assembly, be
authorized to operate from a separate location with separate offices and separate staffs.
DISABIUTY COVERAGE

Lay Church Workers

1983, p. 159, 11-87, III, 18. That the General Assembly grant authority to the Trustees to
offer disability coverage to clerical, custodial and other lay church workers beginning January
1,1984.
Missionaries, short-term
1976, p. 59, 4-41, III, 2. That the Insurance Committee provide, if available, disability
income coverage for short-tenn missionaries.
ESTATE PLANNING

1976, p. 88, 4-83, II, D, 2. Motion adopted unanimously that Trustees explore a program to
meet the urgent need of educating ministers and sessions for the purpose of providing estate
planning for ministers. "But if any provide not for his own, and especially for those of his own
house, he hath denied the faith, and is worse than an infidel" (1 Timothy 5:8).
1977, p. 95, 5-92, III, 6. That the Fifth General Assembly instruct the Trustees of the
Insurance and Annuity Fund to institute a plan to assist the Teaching Elders and the Courts of
the Church in estate planning for those persons covered under the Annuity Plan.
Grounds:

104

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS

r
I

I

INSURANCE. ANNUITIES AND RELIEF
a.

\
\

b.

Virtually no understanding of what is involved in estate planning except that social
security included in annuity plans is a major component of the Estate Program. in most
cases; therefore. it is not illogical to ask for help with the rest of estate planning.
Recognize that this may overlap with the Foundation or Stewardship. and perhaps will
need to be coordinated.

FISCAL RFSPONSIBIUTY

\

\

I

1990, p. 112, 18-40, III, 36. That the General Assembly adopt the following statement to

clarify fiduciary responsibility as it applies to the IAR Trustees:
"Fiduciary responsibility" is a legal duty that must be respected by both the IAR
Trustees and the General Assembly. but it is not an impenetrable wall that exempts the IAR
Trustees from complying with instructions from the Assembly that do not infringe on the terms
of the trust agreements or general principals of fiduciary law. "Fiduciary responsibility" is
limited in scope to the assets entrusted to the Trustees and the terms of the trust agreements
governing those assets and should not be broadened to cover everything the Trustees do in order
to insulate them from the general role of an agency accountable to the General Assembly.
HONORABLY RETIRED MINISTERS

(See MINISTERIAL RELIEF and BCO 23-2 and 3)
MEDICALLY DISABLED

1986, p. 133, 1~53, III, 16. That the General Assembly direct its Committee on Judicial
Business to prepare ~ording to allow for a designation of "Medically Disabled" (in BCO 23-2
and 3 and/or elsewhere: as appropriate). and to report back to this General Assembly and that the
General Assembly direct its Stated Clerk's office to begin using this designation immediately. as
appropriate.
MONEY PURCHASE PENSION PLAN

1993, p. 114,21-52, III, 7. That the General Assembly approve the Ninth Amendment to
the Presbyterian Church in America Money Purchase Pension Plan (MPP) with the
understanding that later this year. after Congress has passed the tax bill of 1993. the entire MPP
plan document will need to be amended and restated to comply with the new tax law and the
1986 tax law changes and will need to be submitted to the 1994 General Assembly for approval
before it can be submitted to the Internal Revenue Service for a new determination letter.
Adopted
NAME OF BOARD OF TRUSTEES CHANGED

1982, p. 95, 10-71, III, 5. That the official name of the Board of Trustees be changed from
"The Board of Trustees of the Insurance and Annuity Fund of the Presbyterian Church in
America" to "The Board of Trustees of the Insurance. Annuity. and Relief Funds of the
Presbyterian Church in America." and that all applicable documents be changed accordingly.
PARnCIPAnON ENCOURAGED

1974, p. 50, 2-54, II, B, 2. . .. That the General Assembly of the National Presbyterian
Church encourage and urge all of its ministers and congregations to participate in the
denominationally sponsored retirement program. and
Be it Further Resolved. that the General Assembly encourage all the presbyteries of the
National Presbyterian Church to establish a policy of urging participation in the
denominationally sponsored retirement and medical insurance programs in the terms of
a call to a minister.
[Note: Reaffirmed in succeeding years.]

105

PCADIGEST
INSURANCE, ANNUITIES AND RELIEF
1981, p. 111, 9-55, III, 1. That the General Assembly strongly encourage all nonparticipating congregations to participate in the annuity and insurance programs on behalf of
their ministers and lay employees.
1986, p. 132, 14-53, III, 2. That the General Assembly strongly encourage all PCA
presbyteries to require that retirement, health, life and disability insurance benefits be included
in all pastoral calls.
POUCY QUESTIONS

1992, p. 94, 20-47, III, 9. That the moderator of the General Assembly appoint an ad-hoc
committee of 3 to 5 qualified people to study the issues raised in Overtures #2:1 and #36 and
report to the 21st General Assembly with appropriate recommendations. The expenses of the
committee (up to $5,000) will be funded by IAR from its 1992 and 1993 approved budgets
Adopted
("Meetings" line item).
1993, p. 102,21-44. Report of the Ad Interim Committee on Policy Questions of IAR
1.
The Committee recommends that the 21st General Assembly continue this Study
Committee for another year and that the expenses of the Committee (up to $5,000) be
funded, as they were this last year, by IAR from its approved budgets.
Adopted
2.
The Committee recommends that the 21st General Assembly instruct the Committee to
Adopted
bring a report on the PCA Health Plan to the 22nd General Assembly.
3.
The Committee recommends that the 21st General Assembly instruct the Committee to
bring a report on the IAR management of retirement funds to the 22nd General
Assembly.
Adopted
PURPOSE

1983, p. 159, 11-87, III, 10. That the General Assembly adopt the following:
STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
The purpose of the Board of Trustees of Insurance, Annuity, and Relief Funds of the
Presbyterian Church in America is to glorify God through serving His servants who minister in
the church. This service is carried out through providing for the health, welfare and retirement
needs of the denominations ministers, lay church workers and their families.
RATES

1982, p. 96, 10-71, III, 7. That the Board of Trustees be granted permission to adjust health
insurance premiums as required from time to time, but no more often than once each six montHs
between General Assemblies, to protect the viability of the program.
1983, p. 158, 11-87, III, 5. That the General Assembly authorize the Board of Trustees to
enhance the plans and set premium rates for all insurance programs administered by the
Trustees to become effective January 1 of each year. Rates each year will reflect the best
judgement of the Trustees based on the insurance plans, claims experience and insurance
company negotiations and will normally be changed no more often than once per year, except
when necessary to maintain the viability of an insurance plan, and then no more often than once
each six months.
[Note: Reaffirmed in succeeding years.)
REFORMED PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH, EVANGEUCAL SYNOD (RPCES), JOINING &. RECEIVING

1982, p. 96, 10-71, III, 9. That an open enrollment for participation in the PCA Health
Insurance Plan be held for all eligible former RPCES ministers and lay employees during the
months of October, November and December 1982, with coverage and premium payments to
become effective January I, 1983; and that if at least 75% of present RPCES Synod's
Hospitalization Plan participants enroll, the .preexisting conditions limitation for first year
coverage will be waived for the entire group.

106

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
INTERCHURCH RELATIONS
1982, p. 96, 10-71, III, 10. That during the period of open enrollment as provided and
conditioned by Recommendation 9, if at least 75% of the present Covenant Theological
Seminary participants enroll, the preexisting conditions limitations for first year coverage will
be waived for the group, if this provision is approved by the insurance carrier.
SOCIAL SECURITY PROGRAM

1973, p. 49, 1-67,5. We suggest that all ministers be participants in the Social Security or
Self Employment Tax program available in our country.
1974, p. 50, 2-54, II, B, 3. That we again suggest that all ministers be participants in the
Social Security Program.
1987, p. 152, 15-68, 111,1. That the General Assembly remind its ministers:
(a)
that the only legal ground for opting out of the Social Security system is conscientious
or religious principles objection to participating in a government sponsored program
(with respect to services performed as a minister) which makes payments in the event of
death, disability, old age or retirement, or makes payments towards the costs of or
provides services for, medical care, and
(b)
that those whose consciences do not allow such participation should make adequate
arrangements for disability, survivor, and post-retirement health coverages and
retirement income.
1988, p. 140, 16-62, III, 1. That the General Assembly remind its ministers and ministerial
candidates:
(a)
that the only legal ground for opting out of the Social Security system is conscientious
or religious principles objection to participating in a government-sponsored program
(with respect to services performed as a minister) which makes payments in the event of
death, disability, old age or retirement, or makes payments towards the costs of or
provides services for, medical care, and
(b)
that those whose consciences do not allow such participation should make adequate
alternative arrangements for disability, survivor, and post-retirement health coverages
and retirement income.

INTERCHURCH RELATIONS
ASSOCIATE REFORMED PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH

1981, p. 103, 9-43, III, R. That the Permanent Sub-committee on Interchurch Relations
meet with representatives of Covenant Presbytery and with representatives of the Associate
Reformed Presbyterian Church to report the outcome of the General Assembly's action, to
assure them of our good will, and to effect any reconciliation possible.
1982, p. 63,10-24, III, 14. In the matter of fraternal relations with the Associate Reformed
Presbyterian Church, the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America makes the
following affirmations:
a)
We recognize that it is possible for Christians and for judicatories to say and do things
that offend other Christian brethren; and we acknowledge that offenses against
Christian brethren do occur and have occurred that affect the testimony of the Church
before the watching world.
b)
We reaffirm our commitment to fraternal relations with the Associate Reformed
Presbyterian Church.
[Note: This pertained to the PCA's reception of a former ARP congregation that had failed to
follow ARP procedures.]

107

PCADIGEST
ThITERCHURCHRELATIONS
1983, p. 166,11-95. Personal Resolution #5
Whereas, the Associate Reformed Presbyterian Church was begun in 1733, and
Whereas, the "Seceder" Movement was fonned out of a concern for the truth and purity of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, and
Whereas, one branch of the "Seceders" is today part of the ARP, and
Whereas, the last distinctive "Seceder" branch is in this country, the Associate Reformed
Presbyterian Church of North America merged with the Reformed Presbyterian Church
of North America on June 7, 1969,
Therefore, be it resolved that the 11th General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in
America, meeting in Norfolk, Virginia, does hereby instruct the PCA Fraternal
Delegates to the Synod of the Associate Reformed Presbyterian Church and the
Reformed Presbyterian Church of North America to convey to these bodies the
following greetings:
"Fathers and Brethren, we of the PCA rejoice with you in the 250th celebration of the
founding of the Associate Reformed Presbyterian Church. We are moved by the love
for the Saviour and warm evangelistic fervor and zeal manifest in the movement. We
are grateful to God for the historic witness which was raised in Scotland and America
by the "Seceders", and are inspired by their gracious example. We pray that we all will
continue to learn from unique testimony, as well as from their willingness to join with
others of like precious faith as an expression of the visible unity of the body of Christ.
In accord with the ARP heritage may we together seek to be faithful to King Jesus the
Head of the Church."
BUDGET

1984, p. 109, 12-39, III, 7. That in order for the Permanent Committee to function, as a
matter of policy the Committee of Commissioners recommends that the Interchurch Relations
Committee submit budgetary requests to the COA.
CHRISTIAN REFORMED CHURCH

1983, p. 127, 11-64, III, 2. That the Presbyterian Church in America continue fraternal
relations with the Christian Reformed Church.
1991, p. 68. 19-19, III. 5. That this communication be sent to the Christian Reformed
Church:
The Presbyterian Church in America praises God for the vigorous and vital witness to
our Lord Jesus Christ through the Reformed faith that the Christian Reformed Church has long
maintained. We are grateful that many who have been nurtured and matured in your fellowship
have come to us and been used to strengthen our church in faith and witness.
It is then, with respect, humility and gratitude toward you, and with deep concern for
the retention and propagation of the Reformed faith that we entreat you to reverse the 1990
action opening the offices of minister and ruling elder to women.
We believe this to be contrary to the clear teaching of Scripture (1 Timothy 2, 3) and
the Belgic Confession (Article XXX).
1992, p. 68, 20-22, III, 12. Resolved, that the 20th General Assembly hereby instruct the
Interchurch Relations Committee to prepare documentation with regard to the Christian
Reformed Church for presentation to the 21st General Assembly, such documentation to include
such matters as the view of Scripture, the toleration of beliefs in evolution and homosexuality,
and the treatment of brethren who have stood against these modernist trends.

108

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
INTERCHURCH RELATIONS
1993, p. 59,21-17, 111,4. That the 21st General Assembly in response to Communication
No. 2 from the Christian Reformed Church dated October 21, 1992, adopt the following
resolution:
The Presbyterian Church in America expresses our thanksgiving to God that the Synod
of the Christian Reformed Church in 1992 refused to ratify the change in the Church
Order Article 3 that would have opened the office of minister, elder and evangelist to
women, and assures the Christian Reformed Church that we shall continue to pray for
God's blessing and leading among them. "As you presently meet, we will earnestly
pray that your Synod will experience the power of the Holy Spirit as you strive for
Adopted
renewed faithfulness to the reformed heritage we hold in common. "
1993, p. 63,21-17, III, 7a. That General Assembly answer Overture 35 in the negative. A
substitute motion to answer in the affirmative prevailed.
Adopted
"Instruct IRC reo Concerns about CRC"
Therefore Be it Resolved that the Louisiana Presbytery hereby overtures the 21st General
Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America to instruct the stated clerk to write a
letter to the stated clerk of the CRC expressing our grave concerns over these matters
and calling the CRC to repentance over its departure from the Scriptures in its doctrine
and practice.
Further Be it Resolved that the 21st General Assembly instruct its delegates to NAPARC to
express this concern and to communicate our desire to see the CRC correct these errors
and repent of these sins.
1993, p. 68,21-17, 111,9•...that Interchurch Relations Committee comply with instructions
given by 20th General Assembly.
Resolved, that the 21st General Assembly hereby instructs the Interchurch Relations Committee
to prepare documentation with regard to the Christian Reformed Church for
presentation to the 22nd General Assembly, such documentation to include such
matters as the view of Scripture, the toleration -of beliefs in evolution and
homosexuality, and the treatment of brethren who have stood against these modernist
trends [M20GA, 20-22, ill, 12, p. 68].
Adopted
1993, p. 169,21-62. Protest Regarding Answer to Overture 35
The undersigned respectfully, but solemnly, m~t in conscience protest the action of the
21st General Assembly in answering in the affirmative Overture 35 from Louisiana Presbytery
concerning the Christian Reformed Church.
The allegations raised against the Christian Reformed Church in the "Whereas" portion
of the Overture are indeed serious and, if proven true, warrant an expression of concern called
for by the Overture. There is no dissent regarding the seriousness of the issues raised.
What the undersigned must in conscience protest is that the Assembly, in adopting this
Overture, has accepted and spread upon its Minutes allegations contained in the "Whereas"
portion of the overture, allegations against brothers not formally substantiated to this General
Assembly in violation of Biblical principles of love and j~tice, principles embodied in our own
Rules of DisciPline. Specifically,
1.
The allegations were not proven. While some members of the Assembly may have
personal knowledge of the matters referred to in the Overture, all members of the
Assembly did not, nor did the Assembly as a whole have documentation of the charges
laid before it. While reference was made in discussion of the Overture to press
clippings, these were not provided to the Assembly for examination, nor would the
Assembly itself be content to be judged by some of its own press clippings. The
Assembly essentially has accepted as proven charges supported only by hearsay.
2.
There was no opportunity for the "accused" to reply to the allegations, to correct
misunderstandings, to provide explanatory information, or to make any defense. Yet,
Proverbs 18:17 says that "The first to present his case seems right, till another comes
forward and questions him." The Assembly has acted after hearing only the accuser.

109

PCADIGEST
INTERCHURCH REI..AnONS
3.

Both the Scriptures and our own Standards require the testimooy of witnesses before
convicting a brother of wrong. Yet no witnesses, in the sense of those with first-hand
personal knowledge of the matters at issue, were heard or questioned by the Assembly.
Perhaps an analogy may help clarify. A court dealing with charges may have members
who are personally acquainted with many of the facts surrounding the matter. This personal
acquaintance, however, does not except the courts from providing due process to all parties,
from hearing witnesses, gathering and weighing evidence, and from allowing accused parties to
be heard. Courts which have done so have sometimes found that the "facts" turned out to be
different than they at first appeared.
The issue before the General Assembly is not strictly a judicial matter, in that the
Christian Reformed Church is not subject to the jurisdiction of the Assembly. Surely, however,
these principles of justice and fairness apply in dealing with those outside our jurisdiction as
well as with those under our jurisdictioo.
There would be no cause for protest if the Overture had been prefaced in such terms as
"Whereas it has been reported that ... " and had the clerk been directed to "express our concern
over these reports and the seriousness of the issues raised as, if true, being departures from the
Scriptures in doctrine and practice that call for repentance".
Since, however, the Overture as adopted appears to condemn brothers without
testimony, proof of charges, or opportunity for defense, the undersigned in conscience must
respectfully protest these apparent violations of Biblical demands of love and justice.
CHURCHFS IN CORRESPONDENCE

(See PART V: POSmON PAPERS, Interchurch Relations, pp. 404-405)
CHURCHFS OUTSIDE THE USA AND CANADA

(See PART V: POSmON PAPERS, Interchurch Relations, pp. 407-408)
COMITY AGREEMENT (GOLDEN RULE)

1985, p. 98, 13-44, Ill, 9. That we affirm the following courteous code of behavior to
guide our church planting ministries in North America:
A.
We will be sensitive to the presence of existing churches and missions ministries of
other NAPARC churches and will take great care in receiving members of these
existing ministries.
B.
We will communicate with the equivalent or appropriate agency (denominatiooal
missions committee or board, Presbytery missions or church extension committee, or
session) before initiating church planting activities in a neighborhood where NAPARC
churches or missions ministries exist.
C.
We will provide information on at least an annual basis describing progress in our
ministries and future plans.
D.
We will encourage our regional home missions leadership to develop good working
relationships.
(GroLUlds: The above is the "Golden Rule" Comity Agreement of NAPARC as slightly
amended)
1987, p. 165, 15-80, III, 6. That the General Assembly accept the explanation made by
NAPARC and adopt its "Golden Rule Comity Agreement."
a.
NAPARC defined "enlisting" as "actively recruiting" and felt that the paragraph
regarding communicating is sufficiently clear without further refinement or definition.
b.
The "Golden Rule Comity Agreement" as adopted by all the NAPARC churches but the
PCA reads as follows:
"That we affirm the following courteous code of behavior to guide our church planting
ministries in North America:

110

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
INTERCHURCH RELATIONS
We will be sensitive to the presence of existing churches and missions
ministries of other NAPARC churches. and will refrain from enlisting members
and take great care in receiving members of these existing ministries. .
2)
We will communicate with the equivalent or appropriate agency
(denominational missions committee or board. Presbytery missions or church
extension committee. or session) before initiating church planting activities in a
community where NAPARC churches or missions exist.
3)
We will provide information on at least an annual basis describing progress in
our ministries and future plans.
4)
We will encourage our regional home missions leadership to develop good
working relationships. "
1989, p. 152, 17-82, III, 10. That amendments to the BCD are unnecessary to enable
Session and Presbyteries to be guided by the NAPARC AGREEMENT. and that the Assembly
communicate the NAPARC AGREEMENT to Sessions and Presbyteries for their guidance.
1)

CORRESPONDING CHURCHES ABROAD

(See PART V: POSmON PAPERS. Interchurch Relations. p. 408)
ECCLESIASTICAL FELLOWSHIP

(See PART V: POSmON PAPERS. Interchurch Relations. pp. 406-407)
Redefining of the Nature of Relations with Other Churches
(See PART V: POSmON PAPERS. Interchurch Relations. pp. 408-410)
EVANGELICAL PRFSBYTERIAN CHURCH

1989, p. 59, 17-13, III, 3. That the PCA continue communications with the EPC by
exchanging observers at national meetings. but that the PCA not seek a relationship of
"ecclesiastical fellowship" with the EPC under the current circumstances because of their
irrevocable position providing for the ordination of women as ruling and teaching elders.
FRATERNAL DELEGATFS

1977, p. 73, 5-66, III, 2. That the General Assembly pay full expenses of lodging and
meals for fraternal delegates to the PCA Assembly. beginning with this General Assembly;
FRATERNAL RELATIONS

(See PART V: POSmON PAPERS. Interchurch Relations. pp. 404-4(6)
FUNCI10NAL RELATIONS

(See PART V: POSmON PAPERS. Interchurch Relations. p. 406)
GUIDING PRINCIPLES FOR ECUMENICAL RELATIONS

(See PART V: POSmON PAPERS. Church Union. Guiding Principles for Ecumenical
Relations. pp. 149-158)
INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL OF REFORMED CHURCHES

1990, p. 69, 18-16, III, 3. That request be made of the International Council of Reformed
Churches to include the PCA on its mailing list of corresponding churches to receive all reports.
notices. and other material deemed appropriate to the PCA as an interested church body. the
expense of such correspondence to be borne by the PCA as determined by the ICRC.

111

PCADIGEST
INTERCHURCH RELATIONS
1993, p. 67, 21-17, III, 8. Recommend that General Assembly concur with Permanent
Committee's answer to Communication #1, namely, that we see no conflict on initiating another
Presbyterian and Reformed fellowship through WEF and that we will continue to observe the
Adopted
ICRC.
Communication 1 from the Orthodox Presbyterian Church
"Urge PCA to Join ICRC"
That the Assembly urge the Presbyterian Church in America to apply for membership in the
ICRC and that the Assembly express to the PCA regret that the PCA is proceeding to initiate
another worldwide Presbyterian and Reformed fellowship.
KOREAN AMERICAN PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH

1980, p. 80,8-43, IV, 2. That the General Assembly at this time decline the invitation from
the Korean American Presbyterian Church.
Reason: The multiplicity of Presbyterian and Reformed groups in Korea and among Koreans in
this country suggests care to avoid any suggestion of partiality.
1981, p. 97, 9-43, III, F. That the General Assembly decline to send a delegate to the
General Assembly of the Korean American Presbyterian Church, but instruct the Stated Clerk to
extend fraternal greetings.
1982, p. 63, 10-24, III, 12a. That the General Assembly approve the reception of the
Korean American Presbyterian Church into the membership of the North American
Presbyterian and Reformed Council.
1982, p. 63, 10-24, III, 13. That the General Assembly express its desire to enter into
fraternal relations with the Korean American Presbyterian Church; and that the Sub-Committee
on Interchurch Relations be authorized to appoint two Fraternal Delegates to the up-coming
meeting of the General Assembly of that Church. (It is understood that these Fraternal
Delegates will be in the area at the time of this meeting, thus minimizing expenses.)
WRD'S DAY ALLIANCE

1975, p. 87, 3-73, 7. That the Sub-Committee on Interchurch Relations be encouraged to
continue observer-status with the Board of Managers of The Lord's Day Alliance.
1976, p. 67,4-59,7. That we commend the work of the Lord's Day Alliance and continue
among our people and in our communities a deep concern for the increasing commercialization
of the Lord's Day, including its careless use in work and pleasure by church members, urginft.
that the pulpit ministry and teaching instruments of the church support strongly a witness to the
Biblical materials on the observance of the Lord's Day as holy unto the Lord.
MEMBERSHIP

1974, p. 76, 2-100, II, A, 3, b. That the membership of the Committee on Interchurch
Relations be set at 3 ministers and 3 ruling elders, established in classes, with the Stated Clerk
of the General Assembly as member ex officio.
1976, p. 67,4-59, 13. The Committee of Commissioners urges the Commissioners to the
General Assembly to give careful consideration to the deliberate election to the permanent SubCommittee on Interchurch Relations of at least one man each who has been received from the
OPC and the RPCES.
The Stated Clerk has pointed out that over half of the constituent churches of our
denomination were never in the PCUS: moreover, many of our ministers came from other
denominations, and this ecumenical character of the PCA should be recognized, and the
available insights of these men utilized.

112

ASSEMBLY ACI10NS
INTERCHURCH RELATIONS
NAPARC (NORm AMERICAN PRESBYTERIAN AND REFORMED COUNCIL)

(See also PART IV: BYLAWS, MANUALS AND GUIDELINES, Interchurch Relations)
1975, p. 86, 3-73.
1.
That the General Assembly approve the fonnation of a North American Presbyterian
and Reformed Council and authorize the Committee on Interchurch Relations to
participate in the establishment and organization of such a Council, including the
appointment of four (4) delegates.
2.
That the General Assembly accept the proposed Constitution and By-laws as the basis
for the North American Presbyterian and Reformed Council. (The Assembly should
notice that a two-thirds vote of the Assembly is requested.)
3.
That upon fonnation of the North American Presbyterian and Reformed Council, the
Committee on Interchurch Relations is authorized to invite two members of each of the
Council's participating Churches to attend the next General Assembly. Further, that the
committee be authorized to send delegates to the top judiciary meetings of the Churches
comprising the NAPARC.
1976, p. 66,4-59.
1.
That the General Assembly recognize the establishment of the North America
Presbyterian and Refonned Council at its Constituting Meeting, held at Geneva
College, Beaver Falls, PA., October 31-November 1, and receive as information the
Minutes of that meeting, deleted slightly, and request that these be included in the
Minutes of this Assembly. (See Appendix C, p. 115)
2.
That this Assembly receive as fraternal delegates representatives of the NAPARC
member churches, and in addition, of the ARPC, until such time as the NAPARC shall
finally act on its application for membership, accepting these member churches as
churches in ecclesiastical fellowship with us; furthennore, that one such representative
of each denomination named be heard by this Assembly at an appropriate time. In
addition, that these brethren be welcomed as corresponding members and be accorded a
speaking right on the floor in our deliberations.
3.
That the Committee on Interchurch Relations shall be charged with the responsibility of
appointing this Church's representatives to all meetings of NAPARC and to act for us
according to the limitations of the NAPARC Constitution and of our own.
4.
That the Committee on Interchurch Relations be authorized to send delegates to the
member churches of NAPARC and to the Associate Refonned Presbyterian Church,
including both Teaching and Ruling Elders.
10.
That the Committee on Administration be authorized to cover our fair share of the
NAP ARC budget.
1977, p. 73, 5-66, III, 3. That the Assembly encourage the practice of occasional pulpit
exchange among NAPARC member church.
1977, p. 74, 5-66, III, 6. That the Assembly approve the amended and strengthened
statement of "Basis" of NAPARC, amended by substitution to read as follows:
"Confessing Jesus Christ as only Savior and Sovereign Lord over all of life, we affinn the basis
of fellowship of Presbyterian and Reformed Churches to be full commitment to the Bible in its
entirety as the Word of God written, without error in all its parts and to its teaching as set forth
in the Heidelberg Catechism, the Belgic Confession, the Canon of Dort, the Westminster
Confession of Faith, and Westminster Larger and Shorter Catechisms."
1980, p. 80, 8-43, IV, 4. ·That the General Assembly approve participation in a proposed
NAPARC study of the science of Hermeneutics, naming TE O. Palmer Robertson and TE R. C.
Sproul as PCA members of this study committee.
Reason: This study should benefit the PCA, especially in its understanding of the positions of
the other Churches in NAPARC. The two men named are knowledgeable in the area and are
willing to serve.

113

PCADIGEST
INTERCHURCH RELATIONS
Agreement on Transfer of Members and Congregations
(See PART V: POSmON PAPERS, NAPARCs Agreement on Transfer of Members, pp.
437-438)
Constitution
(See PART IV: BYLAWS, MANUALS AND GUIDELINES, Interchurch Relations)
NATIONAL ~TlON OF EVANGEU~ (NAE)
(See also CHAPLAINS, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF EVANGEUCALS)

1986, p. 110, 14-38, 111,7. That the Presbyterian Church in America now enter into full
membership in the National Association of Evangelicals. Your committee has thoroughly
studied the matter over the course of several years, and wishes to fully inform you of reasons
advanced for and against this proposal. Attached are these papers: (See Appendix H, p. 321)
Paper A - Reasons Favoring Mfiliation with the National Association of Evangelicals
Paper B - Statement of Faith of NAE
Paper C - Projected Annual Expense to the PCA for Membership in NAE
Paper D - Minority Report, opposing joining NAE
A motion that matters of funding the membership of the PCA in the NAE be referred to the
Committee of Commissioners on Administration for their recommendation was adopted.
1986, p. 175, 14-74, III, 63. That should the recommendation from the Inter-church
Relations Committee for the PCA to join the NAE be approved. the cost of annual dues be
divided proportionately among the permanent committees of the PCA based upon the overall
budgets of the permanent committees.
1987, p. 165, 15-80, III, 4. That the selection of PCA representatives to the NAE be
according to the following procedure: that the denominational representatives of the PCA on
NAE Commissions/Affiliates and as official delegates to the NAE Convention shall be named
by the Interchurch Relations Committee, after consultation with the respective
Committees/Agencies of the PCA. The Interchurch Relations Committee may also nominate
members at large on Commissions/Affiliates after inviting nominations from presbyteries.
1987, p. 165, 15-80, III,S. That the funding of expenses for PCA representatives to the
NAE be as follows: that as funds are available, the respective Committees/Agencies of the
PCA are to pay the expenses of the members of. th~ pennanent committees and their staff
members, who serve as denominational representatives on NAE Commissions/Mfiliates and as
official delegates to the NAE Convention. The General Assembly is to pay for any other
denominational representatives to the NAE Commissions/Affiliates and as official delegates to
the NAE Convention.
1992, p. 66, 20-22, III, 7. That Overture 17 from Heritage Presbytery be answered as
follows:
"The Interchurch Relations Committee accepts the responsibility as outlined in the
vverture. Further, that the report of the representatives to NAE will be distributed as is being
done this year. "
Whereas, the PCA joined the National Association of Evangelicals several years ago, and
Whereas, the General Assembly has not heard much about our involvement in NAE recently,
Therefore Be it Resolved that as long as PCA remains a part of NAE, that the Interchurch
Relations Committee is hereby charged with the responsibility of annually reporting
upon and keeping the General Assembly aware of the work of the NAE, and also
keeping the entire PCA aware through the peA Messenger or other appropriate means.

114

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
INTERCHURCH RELATIONS
NATIONAL COUNCIL OF CHURCHES

1973, p. 46, 1-66,9. That the General Assembly affinn as its position that no work of this
Committee of the General Assembly be carried on in cooperation with those denominations
which are a part of the National or World Councils of Churches.
[Note: P~ition reaffirmed in 1975. p. 123.3-93. C-2; 1976. p. 61.4-45. VI.]
ORTHODOX PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH (OPe)

1976, p. 67, 4-59, 11. That this General Assembly acknowledge with gratitude and
Christian love the communication of the General Synod of the Reformed Presbyterian Church.
Evangelical Synod. May. 1976. regarding our common ecumenical concerns. also the action of
the General Assembly of the Orthodox Presbyterian Church. May. 1976. in instructing its
Committee on Ecumenicity and Interchurch Relations to study a similar communication. In
response this General Assembly requests its own Committee on Interchurch Relations. together
with the Moderator. Past-moderators. and the Clerk of the General Assembly as Ex-officio
members. to consider carefully the matters suggested by the Reformed Presbyterian
commwlication and, furthennore. to endeavor to fashion a long-range policy of mutual concern.
activities. and the persuance of unity with these denominations. reporting to the next General
Assembly. We remind sister churches that we are still an infant denomination and that
obligations we feel for the fum establishment of our church and of our congregations require
that we avoid any appearance of haste in these matters. At the same time. we take this initial
step so as to support those Biblical principles which place us WIder the divine tension of tmity in
the body of Christ visible. wherever and however this may be encouraged or engaged without
compromise of our standards or of our primary responsibilities to our member churches.
1982, p. 62, 10-24, III, 8. That future relations with the OPC be referred to the Pennanent
Committee on Interchurch Relations and that the General Assembly ask the presbyteries to
consent to an invitation by the Eleventh General Assembly. if the way be clear. to the OPe to
effect and perfect one church under the Constitution of the PCA. (Deferred for a report on the
constitutionality of this motion by the permanent Sub-Committee on Judicial Business. The
report was adopted in 10-53. p. 77.
Recommendation 8 was then divided on line two after the word "Relations". The first
part of the motion was adopted as follows. and the remaining part was defeated.)
That future relations with OPe be referred to the Pennanent Committee on Interchurch
Relations.
1984, p. 109, 12-39, III, 2. We would encourage the deepening of knowledge of and
fellowship with the Orthodox Presbyterian Church through articles about the Orthodox
Presbyterian Church history and faith. by inviting Orthodox Presbyterian speakers to churches
and church courts and the exchange of pulpits. and by the exchange of pulpits. and by the
exchange of church ~pers.
1986, p. 111, 14-38, III, 8.
a.
That the Fourteenth General Assembly reissue the invitation of the PeA to the OPC to
join and be received on the basis of the joint statement adopted by the Eleventh General
Assembly (MllGA. p. 127-128).
b.
That the Penn anent Committee on Interchurch Relations continue to be the appropriate
representative of the PeA for any discussion pursuant to Joining and Receiving.
The Stated Clerk was directed to include the vote of the Orthodox Presbyterian Church General
Assembly of 78-68 in the communication to the presbyteries regarding this matter.
Reason: The Committee felt that continued discussion of ecumenical relations between the
OPC and PeA is warranted. The Committee also feels that the process of Joining and
Receiving remains the best vehicle to achieve this.

115

PCADIGEST
ThnERCHURCHRELATIONS
1987. p. 165. 15-80. III. 2. That the Committee on Interchurch Relations be granted the
permission of the General Assembly to enter into ~sion with the OPC in order to be
allowed to explore what options are feasible for us in order to move to the common goal of
union.
1988. p. 38. 16-3. A. Communication 1
...That in response to the request of the PCA Committee on Interchurch Relations the
Assembly inform the 16th General Assembly that the Assembly would like its Committee on
Ecumenicity and Interchurch Relations to meet with representatives of the following agencies of
the PCA: the Committees on Christian Education and Publications, Mission to North America,
Mission to the World, Administration, and Covenant Seminary, together with representatives of
corresponding agencies of the OPC, at mutually agreeable times, and the Assembly would
deeply appreciate the PCA General Assembly giving its encouragement and help so that such
meetings can be held; and that the Assembly inform the PCA Assembly that our purposes in
seeking to have these meetings are, in pursuance of our mutually expressed desire "to move to
the common goal of union", inter alia, to obtain an understanding of one another's means of
operation and goals and the effect of union on the operations of the opes agencies.
1988. p. 118. 16-25. III. 9. That the Communication #1, p. 37, from the OPC General
Assembly to our 16th General Assembly be received with gratitude; and, that, if the 16th
General Assembly postpones the adoption of the Statement of "Guiding Principles for
Ecumenical Relations" in order to hear from the Presbyteries/Sessions, the Assembly direct its
Committee on Interchurch Relations to enter promptly into discussion of this Statement with the
OPC Committee so that both denominations may adopt the same principles before directly
discussing how we may "move to the common goal of union." That therefore, the Assembly
instruct the Committee on Interchurch Relations to set up meetings with our Committees and
Agencies only after the principles have been adopted by both denominations.
1989. p. 59. 17-13. III. 5. That the 17th General Assembly direct our permanent
Committee on Interchurch Relations to continue face to face discussions with the OPC
Committee on Ecumenicity (or between corresponding sub-committees) concerning the
possibility of movement toward union, and with particular regard to the "Proposed Guiding
Principles for Ecumenical Relations" sent down by the Sixteenth General Assembly.
1990. p. 63. 18-15. III. 2. That the assembly respond to overtures 4, 5, 9, 20, 24, 25 by
informing the OPC that the best way that the PCA can understand the desire of the OPC for
union is for the OPC to take their necessary constitutional steps requesting to be received into
the PCA, and that the Interchurch Relations Committee continue to be available to the OPC
Committee on Ecumenicity and Interchurch Relations for discussion of matters relating to the
joining and receiving process.
1991. p 65. 19-19. III. 1. That the 19th General Assembly affirm its desire that this
committee continue to be available to the OPC Ecumenicity committee for discussion of matters
relating to the joining and receiving process; that we rejoice in the reported progress of these
discussions, and support them with our prayers.
1992. p. 63. 20-21. 111.1. Communication 3 From the Orthodox Presbyterian Church
"Consider Merger, notJ & R"
Fathers and Brethren:
The recently concluded (.June 6, 1991) 58th General Assembly of the Orthodox
Presbyterian Church was informed, via the report of its Committee on Ecumenicity and
Interchurch Relations, of the decision of your 1990 Gen~ral Assembly "(to inform) the OPC that
the best way that the PCA can understand the desire of the OPC for union is for the OPC to take
their necessary constitutional steps requesting to be received into the PCA, and that the
Interchurch Relations Committee continue to be available to the OPC Committee on
Ecumenicity and Interchurch Relations for discussion of matters relating to the joining and
receiving process. "

116

I

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
INTERCHURCH RELATIONS
It surely is no secret that many in the OPC, including some who have favored and some
who have not favored the joining and receiving proposals that came before our General
Assembly in 1981 and 1986, believe that the joining and receiving process itself has engendered
difficulties in the OPC. For some, the joining and receiving process is an obstacle to the
eventual joining of our churches on a biblical basis.
During discussion of this topic at our General Assembly it was moved and carried that
"the 58th General Assembly reaffirm to the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in
America our desire for closer union with the PCA, and plead with our brethren to reconsider
their rejection of organic union by any process except J & R." This motion received a strong
majority, and we trust that you will give it your prayerful consideration.
May the Lord of the church deliver all of us from all thoughts and stands that can not be
substantiated from His Word, as we seek to reflect more perfectly His desire for one church.
Yours in Christ's service,
lsI Richard A. Barker, Stated Clerk
Response of the peA
The General Assembly of the Orthodox Presbyterian Church
Ruling Elder Richard A. Barker, Stated Clerk
639 Shadowlawn Drive
Westfield, NJ 07090-3357
Fathers and Brethren,
May the rich grace of our Lord Jesus Christ strengthen and nurture your hearts in faith
and love!
We have received your communication, informing "that the 58th General Assembly
(OPC) reaffirm(s) to the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America our desire
for closer union with the PCA and plead(s) with our brethren to reconsider their rejection of
organic union by any process exceptJ & R."
Your clerk's letter concludes with this hope: "May the Lord of the church deliver all of
us from all thoughts and stands that cannot be substantiated from His word, as we seek to reflect
more perfectly His desire for one church."
We rejoice that your General Assembly has reaffirmed its desire for closer union with
the PCA, and further rejoice that we both stand together in this desire, and have adopted the
same "Guiding Principles for Ecumenical Relations." This statement introduces Section IT
(Developing Procedures for Removing Barriers to Unity): "No schedule of conversations, no
procedures for reception or plans for union will be pleasing to the Lord or effective in his
service unless his glory is the motivation of our actions. "
We have abundant evidence that this spirit motivated the representatives of the OPC,
PCA, RPCES, and RPCNA on September 14, 1979 when the idea of inviting other churches to
join the PCA, originally proposed at the 6th General Assembly, come to fruition in the concept
of "joining and receiving". Mer nine years of discussion and various actions relating to J & R,
our 1989. General Assembly reconsidered this, and determined to enter into union discussions
with the OPC. This action brought six overtures from as many presbyteries, expressing great
concern that such discussions would consume inordinate amoonts of our limited time, energy,
manpower, commitment, emotion and financial resources, are "of debatable priority" and would
yield questionable results.
In response to these overtures the 18th General Assembly (1990) directed that the OPC
be informed that "the best way that the PCA can understand the desire of the OPC for union is
for the OPC to f-~"e their constitutional steps, requesting to be received into the PCA, and that
the Interchurc.; 1elations Committee continue to be available to the OPC Committee on
'Ecumenicity and Interchurch Relations for discussion of matters relating to the joining and
receiving process. "

117

PCADIGEST
ThnERCHURCHRELATIONS
The representatives of our three denominations (OPC, PCA, RPCES) in 1979 saw the J
& R process as a biblical, speedy and effective way to fulfill the desire of our Lord for the unity
of His church, and their judgment has been confirmed by majority votes at OPC and PCA
General Assemblies. We are further convinced by events since 1982, when the RPCES entered
the PCA through J & R, that it is the best route to achieve unity and practice prudent
stewardship.
The late Francis Shaeffer warned that the prolonged intricacies of negotiated church
union can bring a drain on our limited resources that our little flocks can ill afford.
The Presbyterian Church in America lovingly assures you that we stand ready to give
sympathetic consideration to your request for reception and again offer its Interchurch Relations
Committee to be available for discussion of any matters relating to the joining and receiving
process that may concern you.
Brethren, pray for us!
In Christ,
The General Assembly of
The Presbyterian Church in America
PAN PRFSBYTERIAN CONFERENCE

1981. p. 97. 9-43. III. D. That the General Assembly decline participation in the PanPresbyterian Conference at this time.
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH IN AUSTRAUA

1974. p. 76. 2-100. II. B. 1. That the communication from the Presbyterian Church in
Australia be answered as follows:
That General Assembly authorize the Committee on Interchurch Relations to enter into
correspondence with the Presbyterian Church in Australia with a view to establishing possible
overseas contact with that Church.
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH U.s.A. (PCUSA)

1979. p. 95. 7-34. III. 3. That in regard to the letter from the PCUS inviting the PCA to
send an ecumenical participant to the next General Assembly, the Stated Cerle be instructed to
inform the PCUS that the PCA does not authorize voting participation in other Assemblies or
Synods.
REFORMED CHURCH U.s. (RCUS)

1981. p. 97. 9-43. III. E. That the General Assembly concur with the Sub-committee in
declining to send a fraternal delegate to the Synod of the Reformed Church US this year, but
that the Stated Cerle be instructed to extend fraternal greetings.
1993. p. 61. 21-17. III. 6a. That General Assembly answer Overtures 31 & 36 in the
negative.
Adopted
Therefore Be It Resolved that the Louisiana Presbytery hereby overtures the 21st General
Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America to inquire into the reported allegations
and to instruct its delegates to NAPARC to vote in favor of the reception of the
Reformed Church in the United States (RCUS) to that organization without further
delay; to establish with the RCUS the relationship of ecclesiastical correspondence,
pending approval by that body.
REFORMED ECUMENICAL SYNOD (RES)

1976. p. 67. 4-59. 6. That the Interchurch Relations Committee study the matter of our
participation in the Reformed Ect.unenical Synod during the coming year, and bring a
recommendation to the next General Assembly.

118

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
INTERCHURCH RELATIONS
1979, p. 94, 7-34, III, 2. That the PCA not join the RES at this time; and that the General
Assembly instruct the Pennanent Sub-Committee on Interchurch Relations to
(a)
assemble a bibliography of official RES documents (Constitution, acts,
pronouncements, committee reports, etc.) as well as historical data relative to the
involvement of our sister denominations: this bibliography to be disseminated to all our
churches as soon as possible after the adjournment of this Assembly; and
(b)
prepare a recommendation for consideration by the Eighth General Assembly
concerning the advisability of membership in the RES by the PCA.
1980, p. 80, 8-43, IV, 3. That in the interest of further information about the Refonned
Ecumenical Synod, the General Assembly authorize the attendance of two observers at the
Nimes meeting of the RES, these persons to be TE James A. Jones, Jr., and TE William Edgar
ID.
Reasons:
(1)
The Seventh General Assembly decided not to join the RES at this time.
(2)
These PCA personnel are on the mission field in France and are expected to be in
Europe at the time of the meeting.
1981, p. 97, 9-43, III, C. That in regard to possible membership in the Reformed
Ecumenical Synod, the General Assembly adopt the recommendations of the representatives to
the RES as follows:
1.
That the PCA seriously consider establishing a relationship with the RES
2.
That the PCA withhold making a decision about membership in the RES pending action
by that body on problems that have arisen among member churches, and
3.
That the PCA be prepared to send observers to the RES in 1984 in order to report on the
outcome of Synod action on the fore-mentioned problems and make apprq>riate
recommendations to the General Assembly.
1985, p. 97, 13-44, III, 4. That the General Assembly no longer pursue consideration of
membership in the Refonned Ecumenical Synod in any fonn, and declare that it will only
become affiliated with RES or any other interchurch body by the deliberate action of the
General Assembly. In adopting this, the Assembly is clarifying its intentions with regard to the
clause in the Joint Statement of 1983 in relation to "honor the commitments of the Orthodox
Presbyterian Church". Lest it be otherwise interpreted, the Assembly is declaring that this
statement will not enter the PCA into membership in RES in any form for any period of time.
REFORMED EPISCOPAL CHURCH

1988, p. 116,16-25, 111,3. That the Interchurch Relations Committee be granted an
extended time for consultation with the Reformed Episcopal Church on possible fraternal
relations until their next General Conference in 1990.
REFORMED PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH, EVANGEUCAL SYNOD (RPCES)

[Note: In 1982 the RPCES joined the PCA.]
(See JOINING AND RECENING, REFORMED PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH, EVANGELICAL
SYNOD; PART V: POSmON PAPERS,Joint Statement on Joining & Receiving, pp. 411-413)
REFORMED PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH OF NORTH AMERICA (RPCNA)

1986, p. 110, 14-38, III, 4. That your committee be given permission to seek a joint
meeting with the Interchurch Relations Committee of the Refonned Presbyterian Church of
North America to discuss mutual relations and areas of cooperation, with the possibility of
proposing next year a plan for joining and receiving for consideration by the 1987 General
Assembly.
1987, p. 165, 15-80, III, 3. That the Committee on Interchurch Relations be granted the
permission of the General Assembly to continue discussions with the RPCNA on a possible
plan for union.

119

PCADIGEST
ThnERCHURCHRELATIONS

1988. p. 116. 16-25. III. 2. That although the Interchurch Relations Committee has no
recommendation, at this time, of possible options relative to a Joining and Receiving with the
Refonned Presbyterian Church of North America; and, that the Committee on Interchurch
Relations be authorized to meet with the interchurCh Committee of the RPCNA to make
arrangements for our General Assembly and their Synod to be held concurrently in 1990 or later
if the way be clear.
WORLD AlllANCE OF REFORMED CHURCHES

1982. p. 63. 10-24. III. 15. That the General Assembly acknowledge the courtesy of the
invitation from the World Alliance of Refonned Churches, to be. represented with an observer at
the General Council in Ottawa in August, but that in the light of the fact that the Presbyterian
Church in America continues at this time to perfect its ecclesiastical relationships, we decline
this invitation with thanks for its having been extended.
WORLD COUNCIL OF CHURCHES

1973. p. 46. 1-66.9. That the General Assembly affinn as its position that no work of this
Committee (MNA) of the General Assembly be carried on in cooperation with those
denominations which are a part of the National or World Councils of Churches.
[Note: Position reaffinned in 1975, p. 123,3-93, C-2; 1976, p. 61, 4-45, VI.]
WORLD EVANGEUCAL FELLOWSHIP

1991. p. 67. 19-19. III. 3. That the paper entitled "Proposal to the World Evangelical
Fellowship Regarding a World Wide Presbyterian and Refonned Fellowship" be adopted as
amended See Appendix B below.
PROPOSAL TO THE WORLD EVANGELICAL FELLOWSHIP REGARDING
A WORLD WIDE PRESBYTERIAN AND REFORMED FElLOWSHIP
The Presbyterian Church in America wishes to propose to the WEF the formation of a
fellowship of Reformed and Presbyterian churches to be established under the auspices of the
WEF.
The purpose of this fellowship would be to provide contact and fellowship between
like-minded churches from various countries around the world at a relatively infonnal level.
We would propose that WEF associated churches from the Reformed branch of Christ's Church
be identified as such, for the purpose of this fellowship" and that a meeting of representatives of
these churches be held in conjunction with the June, 1992, WEF General Assembly in
Indonesia. At that meeting, plans for further or ongoing contact could be drawn up as seemed
good to the churches.
This fellowship would remain informal. One of the reasons we desire it is to avoid
political or cultural entanglements easily blundered into when formal relations are attempted
with churches not already on intimate terms.
.
The sole criteria for membership in this proposed fellowship of recognized Reformed
and Presbyterian churches would be membership in the WEF through the national Association
in a particular country or through Associate member status in the WEF. In this way the
proposed fellowship does not need to take on the sometimes sticky responsibility of enforcing
standards of refonned theology and practice which has plagued other organizations such as the
Reformed Ecumenical Council and others. It is not that these standards do not matter to us, but
rather, it is our desire that the enforcement of Biblical standards be the responsibility of the
various national Associations who are close enough to deal effectively with it.
In addition, the proposed fellowship will encourage a greater sense of being part of the
world Church. Those of us who are already connected to the WEF would encourage churches
who wish to have ties to us to do so through the WEF. Thus, they would need to face their role
as a part of their national church. We hope this would foster a real spirit of oneness among
evangelical churches in their respective countries.

120

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
INVESTOR'S FUND FOR
BUll.l)ING AND DEVELOPMENT
WORLD PRESBYTERIAN AND REFORMED FElLOWSHIP

(See also INTERNATIONAL COUNCll.. OF REFORMED CHURCHES)

1993. p. 59.21-17. III. 1. That the Assembly pause to pray for God's leading and blessing
on steps being taken toward the formation of a World Presbyterian and Reformed Fellowship,
and that God would use this fellowship to strengthen reformed churches around the world and
to further the evangelization of the world, to the honor and glory of Christ.

Adopted

INTERNSIDP
(See MINISTER, PREPARATION FOR THE MINISTRY)

INVF.SfIGATIVE COMMISSION
DELMARVA

1985. p. 93.13-34. Report of Investigative Commission re Delmarva Presbytery.
TE John T. DeBardeleben III led in prayer and presented the report of the judicial commission
appointed by the Thirteenth General Assembly to investigate the complaint by RE J. Breeding
and RE R. Judkins concerning an action of Delmarva Presbytery. The report was received.
(See Appendix S, p. 351ff)
GREATLAKES

1985. p. 96.13-41. Report of Investigative Commission re Great Lakes Presbytery
TE Stuart H. Perrin, Chairman, led in prayer and presented the report of the General Assembly
Investigative Commission Concerning First Presbyterian Church, Louisville, KY.
Recommendations 1 and 2 were adopted and the report was received as a whole. (See
Appendix T, p. 354ff)
Recommendations:
1.
In view of the fact that none of the parties desired to make formal charges against
anyone else, we recommend that no judicial actions be taken against any of the parties
involved
2.
In view of subsequent resignation of the other elders and the pastor of First Church,
thus leaving the church without a session, we recommend that the Presbytery of the
Great Lakes direct its Commission to hold an election of church officers at First
Presbyterian Church in Louisville (with the understanding that the two former Elders
may allow their names to stand in nomination without prejudice).
• In view of First Presbyterian Church's withdrawal from the denomination at a congregational
meeting on January 26, 1985, our Commission deems that its second recommendation is
superfluous. We include it here for information only.
INVF.SfOR'S FUND FOR BUILDING AND DEVELOPMENT
(See also MNA, BUILDING CLUB; FIVE IN FIVE; REVOLVING BUILDING FUND; PART IV:
BYLAWS, MANUALS AND GUIDELINES)
ARTICLFS OF INCORPORATION

(See also PART IV: BYLAWS, MANUALS AND GUIDELINES)

1986. p. 172. 14-74. III, 23. That the Articles of Incorporation (Appendix C, p. 265) of
Investors' Fund for Building and Development of the PCA, Inc. be approved.
1986. p. 265. Appendix C. Attachment B. Articles of Incorporation of Investor's Fund for
Building & Development of Presbyterian Church in America, Inc., A Nonprofit Corporation

121

PCADIGEST
INVESTOR'S FUND FOR
BUILDING AND DEVELOPMENT
BYLAWS

(See PART IV: BYLAWS, MANUALS AND GUIDELINES)
NAME

1986. p. 115. 14-43. III. 5. That the Assembly recognize the Revolving Building Fund,
operated as a trust, as ordered, but under the name "Investors Fund for Building and
Development, Presbyterian Church in America." (Appendix J, Attachment D, p. 369)
POUCY MANUAL

(See PART IV: BYLAWS, MANUALS AND GUIDELINES)
1986. p. 171. 14-74. III. 20. That the Assembly adopt the Basic Policy Guidelines for
Revolving Building Loans (Appendix C, p. 273) as a portion of the policy manual required by
the 13th General Assembly (M13GA, p. 115, 17b.(4» and that the Trustees of the Investors'
Fund for Building and Development be directed to complete the policy manual and submit it to
the 15th General Assembly.
1987. p. 190. 15-91. III. 27. Approve policy guidelines for the Investor's Fund for Building
and Development. (Appendix I, p. 319).
REPORTS

1986. p. 118. 14-43. III. 24. That Overture 30, p. 55, dealing with the Five Million Fund,
be answered in the affirmative [as amended] ...
Grounds:
1.
There has not been adequate response from direct mail efforts.
2.
Point 4 as originally proposed might require additional staff.
1986. p. 55. 14-4. B. Overture 30: From Covenant Presbytery
Therefore be it resolved, that the Session of New Life Presbyterian Church requests Covenant
Presbytery to petition the General Assembly at its 1986 meeting to consider the
following:
1.
That as soon as possible after January first of each year, the Coordinator of Church
Building Programs submit a copy of his annual report to the Chairman of the MNA
Committee of each Presbytery, and he, in tum, make this report a part of his
committee's report to his Presbytery's meeting as soon as possible after receiving it from
the Coordinator. The report should include, but not be limited to, the following:
a.
Names and addresses of all churches that have received church loans, with the
status of each in their repayment commitment.
b.
Names and addresses of all churches who have made formal applications for
loans indicating the amount requested.
c.
Names and addresses of all churches who have been approved for loans
indicating the amount, but not yet funded, during the preceding year.
d.
Names and addresses of all churches having been funded, including the
amount, during the preceding year.
2.
That each MNA Committee of each presbytery be designated to promote the program
within its presbytery bounds.
3.
That churches within the denomination be encouraged to consider helping, financially,
through the Coordinator of Church Building Programs, needy churches, not only at
large, but particular churches within their own presbyteries.
4.
That the GA request the Coordinator to make the building needs of our churches known
on a regular basis through the Messenger.
5.
That the General Assembly again consider an asking amount to be included in church
budgets beginning in 1987.
This overture is submitted that God might be glorified through this ministry.

122

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
JOINING AND RECEIVING

JEWISH EVANGELISM
1992. p. 111.20-51.14. "Evangelism of Jewish People"
Whereas, Messiah Jesus commanded that "repentance and forgiveness of sins be preached in
His name to all nations beginning at Jerusalem (Luke 24:47); and
Whereas, there has been an organized effort on the part of some who claim to profess the name
of Christ to deny that Jewish people need to come to Him to be saved; and
Whereas, these people have spread a false hope and security that Jewish people can inherit
eternal life apart from the faith in God's New Covenant promises foretold by the Jewish
prophets (Jeremiah 31:31, Isaiah 53);
Therefore, Be it Resolved the 20th General Assembly of the PCA re-affinns that: we are "not
ashamed of the gospel, because it is the power of God for the salvation of everyone who
believes: first for the Jew, then for the Gentile" (Romans 1:16); and
Re-affirms that anyone and everyone - Jewish or Gentile - who fails to receive Jesus, Messiah
of Israel, as Savior and Lord, as taught in the New Covenant, will perish eternally; for
Peter, appointed as Apostle to the Jewish people (Galatians 2:7), pleaded with the men
of Israel, "save yourselves from this corrupt generation" (Acts 2:1-41); and
Re-commits itself to prayer for all peoples - Jewish & Gentile, to tum to the God of Israel and
His Holy Messiah Jesus in faith, as the Westminster Larger Catechism states, we are to
pray that "the gospel [be] propagated throughout the World, the Jews called, the fullness
of the Gentiles brought in" (Westminster Larger Catechism answer to Question 191);
and
Re-commits itself to the preaching of the gospel of Christ to all peoples - Jewish & Gentile, and
condemns as the worst fonn of anti-semitism withholding the gospel from the Jewish
people; and
Conderms as erroneous the false teaching held by some that salvation for Jews today is possible
apart from the gospel of Christ due to the Abrahamic Covenant, for this heresy
necessarily involves denying the completed atonement for sin accomplished through
our Messiah (Hebrews 9:15).
We therefore re-affirm, in accord with the scriptures and the Westminster Confessron of Faith
and Catechisms, that it is our duty, as Messiah's people, to take the gospel to all the
peoples of the earth, including the Jewish people. We call the Jewish people, through
whom Jesus came, to join us in faith in their own Messiah, obedience to their own
King, Jesus the "King of the Universe", and in proclamation of His gospel to all
peoples, for that same Jesus will one day return to judge the world (Acts 1: 11).

JOINING AND RECEIVING
1979. p. 95. 7-34. III. 5. [Note: The first proposal to authorize preparation of a plan of
union, though failing, resulted in the establishment of a committee to study areas of agreement,
difference and difficulty between the PCA, OPC, and RPCES.J
a)
That a 3/4 vote of those present and voting be required to adopt Recommendation Sh.
Adopted by vote of285-204
b)
That the Assembly approve the statement adopted by the joint meeting of the Fraternal
Relations Committees of the OPC, the PCA, and the RPCES, and authorize the
continuation of consultations with a plan of merger in view;
Following prayer by the Rev. William C. Hughes, the recommendation was then defeated by a
vote of 353 for, 208 against, since a 3/4 majority had been required for passage.
[Clerk's Note: The following amendment to the Report was adopted later during the Assembly
(par. 7-73) by the required two-thirds vote of those present. It is presented here for easier
reference.]
Since Item Sh above received a majority vote, but less than 3/4, the following action is
c)
taken by the General Assembly:

123

PCADIGEST
JOINING AND RECEIVING
That an Ad-Interim Committee be appointed by the General Assembly to meet
with representatives of the RPCES. the OPC and the RPCNA with instructions
not to develop any plan of union. but merely to determine possible areas of
agreement. difference and difficulty that might exist between the three
denominations.
2)
That a committee be appointed by the General Assembly of three ruling elders
and three teaching elders. members to be nominated by the Committee on
Nominations.
3)
That this Committee be funded in the same manner as the Sub-Committee for
Interchurch Relations. and
4)
That this Committee report its findings to the 1980 General Assembly through
the Committee of Commissioners on Interchurch Relations.
Adopted by Vote of418-82.
1979. p. 95. 7-34. 111.6. That the General Assembly assert that this does not constitute a
rejectioo of any cooperative arrangements or ventures that are presently in existence.
1980. p. 80. 8-43. IV. 5. That the Eighth General Assembly of the PCA reaffirm at this
time that portion of its original letter from our First General Assembly to all Churches. which
reads: "As this new member of the family of Churches of the Lord Jesus Christ comes into
being. we necessarily profess the Biblical doctrine of the unity of all who are in Christ... We
greet all believers in an affirmation of the bond of Christian brotherhood. We invite into
ecclesiastical fellowship all who maintain our principles of faith and order."
Reason: The Sub-committee on Interchurch Relations has responded to new channels of
discussion with other Churches of like confessional base for which we are grateful. However.
the Committee of Commissioners feels that the substance of the letter proposed in the Subcommittee Recommendation 4 may have been inappropriate in view of the actions of the
Seventh General Assembly (see M7GA. 7-34. Recommendation 5. p. 95).
Chainnan Clements moved Recommendation No.5. A motion was made and seconded
to substitute for Recommendation no. 5 the "Letter" attached to Recommendation No.4 of the
Sub-committee on Interchurch Relations' report (see p. 154). excluding the text of
Recommendation No.4 itself.
A motion was made and seconded to amend the substitute so that the "Letter" would
read as follows:
LETTER
Adopted by the 1980 General Assembly
Presbyterian Church in America
The General Synods and General Assembly of the Refonned Presbyterian Church.
To:
Evangelical Synod, the Reformed Presbyterian Church of North America, and the
Orthodox Presbyterian Church.
Subject: An invitatioo to effect one Church.
Brethren:
Greetings in the Names of the Lord Jesus Christ, the King and Head of the Church.
Whereas, we hold to and desire to promote a common testimooy to the inerrancy of Scripture,
the system of doctrine contained in the Westminster Confession of Faith and
Catechisms. and the doctrine of the purity of the visible Church; and
Whereas, we feel constrained by our commitments to seek a more perfect unity among us as
members of Christ's body;
Now Therefore, the General Assembly of the Presbyterian church in America. in the bonds of
our Lord Jesus Christ, invites you to come with us for the pwpose of effecting and
perfecting one Church among us. We propose, as the basis of this association, the
above named principles, together with the Book of Church Order of the Presbyterian
Church in America.
1)

124

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
JOINING AND RECENING
It is to be understood that this invitation is an action of the Eighth General Assembly,
and to receive any denomination which responds to this invitation it should be stated that for the
Presbyterian Church in America to consummate any such union, it would have to go through the
constitutional process of approval by subsequent General Assemblies and three-fourths of our
presbyteries. In this constitutional process each denomination must be dealt with separately.
Sincerely in Christ,
Paul G. Settle, Moderator
For the Presbyterian Church in America
RE Michael Williams led the Assembly in prayer.
Two commissioners asked questions related to the Constitution, and the moderator
referred these to the Sub-Committee on Judicial Business. TE Thomas A. Cook, vice-chairman,
subsequently presented the following report on the questions.
Question 1. Does an invitation from the General Assembly to other ecclesiastical bodies require
a three-fourths vote of the presbyteries in order to be issued, on the assumption that an
invitation presupposes receipt of the body upon acceptance of the invitation?
Response 1. The BCO does not speak to the issue of extending an invitation to other
ecclesiastical bodies but it does speak very clearly to receiving other ecclesiastical
bodies. It is the opinion of this sub-committee that the invitation could be extended by
the General Assembly without presbytery consent, but that in doing so the General
Assembly should remind those ecclesiastical bodies that their reception would be
contingent upon the consent of three-fourths of the presbyteries of the PCA (BCO 156).
Question 2. What is the constitutional meaning of the phrase "the doctrine of the purity of the
church?"
Response 2. In responding to the question, the sub-committee has in mind the statement in the
fifth line of the "Letter," which reads, "the doctrine of the purity of the visible Church."
Such language is not found in the standards, but concern for the purity of the visible
Church is clearly expressed in Westminster Confession of Faith 25:4,5, the "Preface to
the Book of Church Order," 11(4), and Book of Church Order 2-1,2-2,22-5(6), and 25-

5.
On motion this report was adopted by the Assembly.
[This letter was approved by a] vote of 525 affirmative, 38 negative.
1980, p. 83,8-43, IV, 6. That the Ad-interim Committee to Discuss ... be continued for one
year and that in the event approaches from any other Churches are made to the PCA during the
coming year, the Ad-~erim Committee be authorized to welcome, receive and study such
approaches; be directed to communicate such information to the Church-at-large by all means
available; and report to the Committee of Commissioners on Interchurch Relations at the Ninth
General Assembly of the PCA ...
1980, p. 83, 8-43, IV, 7.
a.
That the Ad-interim Committee continue to work on its original mandate, and that they
meet with the representative of the OPe, and of the RPCES and RPCNA, if the latter so
desire, to draw up a statement that exhibits the representatives' understanding (or, if
necessary, individual statements that exhibit individual understandings) of the
compatibility of the participating Churches, the statement to take into consideration
discussion of those questions raised by PeA representatives at the joint meeting held
September 14, 1979 (see p. 237), and any other pertinent issues.

125

PCADIGEST
JOINING AND RECEIVING
That the Ad-interim Committee be instructed to report by means of a letter to all
teaching elders and clerks of session no later than February 1, 1981, areas of similarity
and difference among the PeA, OPC, RPeES and RPCNA, giving a brief summary of
each Church's position on these areas based on their standards and assembly
pronouncements, along with a description of the size and location of the individual
churches of each denomination.
c.
That the Ad-interim Committee report to the Ninth General Assembly of the PCA
through the Committee of Commissioners on Interchurch Relations their
recommendations as to future efforts in the area of Church unity.
Reason: The Committee of Commissioners feels that this communication from the
OPC should be responded to positively, and that. as a special study committee, the Adinterim Committee is the proper vehicle to deal with these discussions and make
recommendations.
1981, p. 100, 9-43, III, K. [Note: The following plan for receiving of the OPC into the
PCA was adopted by the 1981 Assembly. The vote of the presbyteries failed by one vote to
approve this invitation during the year 1981-82. It was subsequently reissued in 1983, p. 59,
11-65, ill, 5 and approved by a sufficient number of presbyteries to be officially issued to the
OPC.J
In regard to the reception of the Orthodox Presbyterian Church, we recommend:
1.
That these recommendations shall be acted upon without amendment or deletion due to
the fact that this plan has been app'Oved by the General Assembly of the Orthodox
Presbyterian Church;
2.
That in view of our prior invitation to the Orthodox Presbyterian Church to effect and
perfect one church with the Presbyterian Church in America, the General Assembly
take the first formal vote under paragraph 14-6 of the Book of Church Order: "to
receive under its jurisdiction, with the consent of three-fourths of the presbyteries, other
ecclesiastical bodies whose organization is conformed to the doctrine and order of this
Church." (The adoption of this recommendation confirms the interpretation that the
words "ecclesiastical bodies" include an entire denomination.) Thus all ordained
officers in the Orthodox Presbyterian Church will be received into the Presbyterian
Church in America without examination;
3.
That the Assembly approve and send to the presbyteries for their approval a plan for the
reception of the Orthodox Presbyterian Church as follows:
a.
Upon the approval of three-fourths of the presbyteries of the Presbyterian
Church in America and the completion of the constitutional process in the
Orthodox Presbyterian Church the presbyteries of the Orthodox Presbyterian
Church shall become a part of the presbyteries of the Presbyterian Church in
America according to the boundary proposals contained in recommendation 3b;
b.
Presbytery boundaries shall be drawn as follows:
(See Addendum I for maps and explanatory text)
c.
Presbyterian Church in America presbyteries whose boundaries are affected by
these changes shall take separate action regarding their consent (BCO 14-6).
Presbyterian Church in America presbyteries which do not consent to the
proposed boundaries shall negotiate their boundaries or difficulties with the
assistance of an ecclesiastical commission (BCO 15), consisting of
representatives from each of the joining bodies, appointed for this purpose by
the General Assembly, which commission shall report to the next General
Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America following the reception of the
Orthodox Presbyterian Church:
b.

126

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
JOINING AND RECEIVING
d.

4.

Churches and missions from the Orthodox Presbyterian Church, which have
difficulties adjusting to the new boundaries shall make their concerns known to
the presbytery of jurisdiction, which shall follow ordinary procedures for
resolution of their problems;
That committees and agencies of the Orthodox Presbyterian Church shall be received
by the appropriate committees and agencies of the Presbyterian Church in America as
follows:
a.
The following Orthodox Presbyterian Church agencies, Committee on Foreign
Missions, Committee on Home Missions and Church Extension, Committee on
Education, Committee on Stewardship, shall have the privilege of designating
not more than four persons each as members for an advisory sub-committee to
each of the corresponding permanent committees or subcommittees of the
Presbyterian Church in America (Mission to the World, Mission to the US,
Christian Educatioo). These sub-committee members shall serve for a period of
two years from the date of reception of the church. At the expiration of the
two-year period the sub-committee shall be discontinued. The Orthodox
Presbyterian Church Committee on Diaconal Ministries with its personnel and
assets, shall become an advisory sub-committee of the Mission to the US
Committee. The Ministerial Committee on Pensions and Hospitalization shall
have the privilege of designating not more than two persons each as an
advisory sub-committee to the PCA Board of Trustees for the Insurance and
Annuity Fund. This advisory sub-committee shall serve for a period of two
years, after which it shall be discootinued.
Corporate Charters: The existing corporation charters shall be maintained. The
Presbyterian Church in America shall determine, with the advice of legal
counsel, which of these corporations shall be active and which shall be
dormant. For those corporations which shall be active, the Board of
Directorsffrustees shall be elected as provided in the certificate of corporatioo
and bylaws of the corporation. For those corporations which shall be dormant,
the Board of Directors/l'rustees shall be the Committee 00 Administration of
the Presbyterian ChW"ch in America.
The Stated Clerk of the Orthodox Presbyterian Church shall serve as an
associate clerk for a period of two years. The compensation shall be
determined by the Committee on Administration on the basis of the work load
required.
b.
The staff persons serving the Orthodox Presbyterian Church in the following
positions shall be retained by the Presbyterian Church in America permanent
committees or sub-committees for at least one year following reception, to wit:
Committee on Foreign Missions-General Secretary, Controller; Committee on
Home Missions- General Secretary; Committee on Christian Education
General Secretary; Committee on Stewardship-General Secretary. The salaries
and benefits of these persons shall continue at their present level, but no higher
than the maximum salary set by the General Assembly for their counterparts.
These persons will be received without examination by the Theological
Examining Committee.

127

PCADIGEST
JOINING AND RECEIVING
c.

Out of respect for the integrity of the Orthodox Presbyterian Church, the
approval of its acceptance of the invitation shall be understood to honor such
commitments as it may have. The ministries presently conducted by the
agencies of the Orthodox Presbyterian Church shall be continued, subject to the
review of the permanent committees and the approval of subsequent General
Assemblies.
5.
That any judicial case pending at the time of the reception of the church in a court of
original jurisdiction shall be continued in the corresponding court of the Presbyterian
Church in America which has jurisdiction of the accused. Any appeal or complaint
pending at the time of the reception shall be returned by the appellate court of the PCA
to the lower court which has jurisdiction of the appellee/respondent. In all cases the
PCA court shall treat the case as a new case timely instituted as of the date of reception,
and shall begin the process anew (de novo). The accuser/appellant/complainant shall
have the right to prosecute the case whether or not the trial court has present jurisdiction
of the accuser/appellant/complainant.
1981, p. 103,9-43, III, U. That the General Assembly address the Orthodox Presbyterian
Church as follows: That while we are anxious to effect one church with you, we wish to make
known to you our great concern in regards to the issue of justification by faith that has been
raised at Westminster Seminary and in Philadelphia Presbytery. Our Prayers will be with you
for a definitive resolution of these matters.
1982, p. 77, 10-53, 1. The Sub-Committee on Judicial Business was directed to respond to
a question from TE David Dively regarding recommendation #8 of the report of the Committee
of Commissioners on Interchurch Relations concerning the method of receiving under its
jurisdiction other ecclesiastical bodies according to BCO 14-6.
It is the opinion of the Sub-Committee on Judicial Business that BCO 14-6 does not
specify whether the Presbyteries shall vote before General Assembly votes or the General
Assembly before the Presbyteries. Therefore, either procedure is constitutional.
If the General Assembly desires to request the Presbyteries to vote before the General
Assembly votes, it must direct the Stated Clerk to request the Presbyteries to vote on the
following overture:
"That
Presbytery overtures the Eleventh General
Assembly to extend an invitation to the OPC to effect and perfect one church under the
constitution of the PCA."
Three/fourths of the Presbyteries must adopt the overture in order for the Eleventh
General Assembly to act on an invitation to the OPC.
1983, p. 127, 11-65, Ill, 3. That the Eleventh General Assembly re-issue the invitation of
the Ninth General Assembly to the Orthodox Presbyterian Church to join with us under the
terms of "The Revised Joint Statement. "
A JOINT STATEMENT
The statement below was adopted jointly and severally at the March 3-6, 1981, joint
meeting in Atlanta, GA and has been modified by the PCA sub-committee on Interchurch
Relations to fit present circumstances. Taken together with your Committee's evaluations above
and the "Comparison of Areas of Similarity and Differences" among the OPC/PCA/RPCES
distributed earlier to our churches, this statement expresses the judgment of your Committee
and of the three committees jointly that there is a compatibility among these churches that
would, if they were joined together, "produce a church that would be of substantially one in its
willingness to deal on a biblical basis with issues that would inevitably arise from time to time"
(Minutes, Forty-seventh General Assemb{y, p. 199).
The statement follows:

128

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
JOINING AND RECEIVING
We have sought to fulfill the mandates given us by our representative major assemblies
in order to make recommendation concerning the reception and joining of the OPC in and with
thePCA.
With joy and thankfulness to the Lord of the Church we recognize that our churches
have a common and sincere commitment to the inerrant Word of God and to the Westminster
Standards as faithfully expressing the system of truth taught in Holy Scripture. Further, we
recognize that our churches are Presbyterian in their order and practice. But above all, we find
clear evidence that each of our churches desires to be faithful to our primary standard, the Bible,
and to our secondary standards as true to the Bible. We acknowledge our weaknesses and
failures but we are one in our commitment to obey the Lord Jesus Christ in his rule over us
through his Word and Spirit
We recognize, however, that due in part to differences of historical development, there
are differences among us as to how our common Presbyterian convictions are applied in
practice. We have given careful attention to those that have been referred to us, and we have
provided a comparison of similarities and differences that we have discussed. No doubt there
are variations of practice that have little or no theological significance but would require mutual
forbearance and understanding during a period of adjustment in the augmented church. It is
also true that there are differences of emphasis among our churches that are to be found within
each of them as well as between them; some of these have their roots deep in the history of
Presbyterianism.
It is apparent to us that, just as within our churches there has been a deep and
continuing desire to be constantly reforming ourselves in conformity to the Word of God, so too
in the augmented Presbyterian Church in America this commitment would be not only
continued but heightened by the reception of the OPC. The OPC, whose ministry would be
joined with that of the PCA, would be called upon to follow the faith and order of the church
that they enter; the' PCA, on the other hand, would further strengthen its life and witness by
welcoming the insights and experience represented by the OPC and seeking to profit from
differences in striving for a more perfect biblical faith and practice. In receiving this
denomination the PCA recognizes the history of the denomination as part of her total history
and receives its historical documents as valuable and significant materials which will be used in
the perfecting of the church.
We, therefore, as committees of our churches, recognize that unity of faith and practice
which our churches have through the grace of God. This unity must draw us together as the
body of Christ and enable us to remove the barriers that would prevent us from full communion
of life and love in an undivided church. We also recognize our need for the grace of the Spirit
and the love of Christ as we seek to reconcile differences and remove practical barriers. We,
therefore, do severally and jointly:
1.
Commend to our respective churches that we become one in organization in
accordance with the invitation of the Presbyterian Church in America:
2.
Urge upon our respective churches the necessity of resolving in the thusaugmented church the differences among us, and others that may arise, in
kindness and forthrightness begotten of love, with the determination that by the
grace of the Spirit of God through the teaching of His Word we shall "all come
in the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God unto . . . the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ." (Eph. 4: 13).

129

PCADIGEST
JOINING AND RECEMNG
And further we, as committees of our respective chW"Ches, do severally
and jointly agree that the above committee of the Orthodox Presbyterian
Church shall recommend to its assemblies in 1984 that the necessary
constitutional actions be taken to begin the process required to join the
Presbyterian Church in America in accordance with its invitation; that the
above-named committee of the Presbyterian Church in America will if the
invitation is accepted by the ope recommend to the General Assembly that the
acceptance be approved, that the procedures stated elsewhere be followed for
the assimilation of the several agencies of the Orthodox Presbyterian Church
into the Presbyterian Church in America; that out of respect for the OPC's
integrity the approval of its acceptance of the invitation shall be understood to
honor such commitments as the church may have and to continue the ministries
presently conducted by the OPC subject to the review of the permanent
committees and approval of subsequent general assemblies; and that the
assimilation of agencies shall endeavor to provide for the just treatment of those
who may not be able, for reasons of conscience, to participate in the acceptance
of the invitation.
3.
That these recommendations shall be acted upon without amendment or
deletion due to the fact that this plan has been approved by the General
Assembly of the Orthodox Presbyterian Church;
1983, p. 128, 11-64, III, 4. That in view of our prior invitation to the Orthodox
Presbyterian Church to effect and perfect one church with the Presbyterian Church in America,
the General Assembly take the first formal vote under paragraph 14-6 of the Book of Church
Order: "to receive under its jurisdiction, with the consent of three-fourths of the presbyteries,
other ecclesiastical bodies whose organization is conformed to the doctrine and order of this
Church." (The adoption of this recommendation confirms the interpretation that the words
"ecclesiastical bodies" include an entire denomination.) Thus all ordained officers in the
Orthodox Presbyterian Church will be received into the Presbyterian Church in America
without examination.
1983, p. 128, 11-64, III, S. That the Assembly approve and send to the presbyteries for
their approval a plan for the receptioo of the Orthodox Presbyterian Church as follows:
a.
Upon. the approval of three fourths of the presbyteries of the Presbyterian Church in
Ameri~ and the completion of the coostitutional process in the Orthodox Presbyterian
Church' the presbyteries of the Orthodox Presbyterian Church shall become a part of the
presbyteries of the Presbyterian Church in America.
b.
Presbytery boundaries shall be drawn as follows:
Joint PCA and OPC Committees shall meet as soon as practicable to work out the
boundaries plan. The basis for this plan shall be the present peA boundaries (M1OGA
pages 324-326) and present OPC boundaries.
REFORMED PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH, EVANGEUCAL SYNOD (RPCES)

1981, p. 97, 9-43, III, J. [Note: The following invitation for the RPCES to join the peA
was adopted by the Assembly and a sufficient number of presbyteries and thus extended to the
RPCES.]
In regard to the reception of the Ref9rmed Presbyterian Church Evangelical Synod, we
recommend:
1.
That these recommendations shall be acted upon without amendment or deletion, due to
the fact that this plan has been approved by the General Synod of the Reformed
Presbyterian Church, Evangelical Synod;

130

I

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
JOINING AND RECEIVING

!

2.

I

3.

1
f

I
I

4.

That in view of our prior invitation to the Refonned Presbyterian Church, Evangelical
Synod to effect and perfect one church with the Presbyterian Church in America, the
General Assembly take the first fonnal vote under paragraph 14-6 of the Book of
Church Order. "to receive under its jurisdiction, with the consent of three-fourths of the
presbyteries, other ecclesiastical bodies whose organization is confonned to the
doctrine and order of this Church." (The adoption of this recommendation confinns the
interpretation that the words "ecclesiastical bodies" include an entire denomination.)
Thus all ordained officers in the Refonned Presbyterian Church, Evangelical Synod will
be received into the Presbyterian Church in America without examination;
That the Assembly approve and send to the presbyteries for their approval a plan for the
reception of the RPCES as follows:
a.
Upon the approval of three-fourths of the presbyteries of the Presbyterian
Church in America and the completion of the constitutional process in the
Refonned Presbyterian Church, Evangelical Synod the presbyteries of the
Refonned Presbyterian Church, Evangelical Synod shall become a part of the
presbyteries of the Presbyterian Church in America according to the boundary
proposals contained in recommendation 3-b; .
b.
Presbytery boundaries shall be drawn as follows:
(See Addendum I for maps and explanatory text)
c.
Presbyterian Church in America presbyteries whose boundaries are affected by
these changes shall take separate action regarding their consent (BCO 14-6).
Presbyterian Church in America presbyteries which do not consent to the
proposed boundaries shall negotiate their boundaries or difficulties with the
assistance of an ecclesiastical commission (BCO 15), consisting of
representatives from each of the joining bodies, appointed for this purpose by
the General Assembly, which commission shall report to the next General
Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America following the reception of the
Refonned Presbyterian Church, Evangelical Synod;
d.
Churches and missions from the Refonned Presbyterian Church, Evangelical
Synod which have difficulties adjusting to the new boundaries shall make their
concerns known to the presbytery of jurisdiction, which shall follow ordinary
procedures for resolution of their problems;
That boards and agencies of the Reformed Presbyterian Church, Evangelical Synod
shall be received by the appropriate committees and agencies of the Presbyterian
Church in America as follows:
a.
The following Refonned Presbyterian Church, Evangelical Synod agencies,
World Presbyterian Missions, Board of Home Ministries, Christian Training
Incorporated, National Presbyterian Missions, shall have the privilege of
designating not more than four persons each as members for an advisory subcommittee to each of the corresponding permanent committees of the
Presbyterian Church in America (Mission to the World, Mission to the US,
Christian Education). These sub-committee members shall serve for a period of
two years from the date of reception of the church. At the expiration of the
two-year period the sub-committee shall be discontinued. The Reformed
Presbyterian Church, Evangelical Synod Committee on Ministerial Welfare and
Benefits and the Board of Pensions shall have the privilege of designating not
more than two persons each as an advisory sub-committee to the PCA Board of
Trustees for the Insurance and Annuity Fund. This advisory sub-committee
shall serve for a period of two years, after which it shall be discontinued.

131

PCADIGEST
JOINING AND RECEIVING

5.

Coeporate Charters: The existing corporation charters shall be maintained. The
Presbyterian Church in America shall determine, with the advice of legal
counsel, which of these corporations shall be active and which shall be
dormant. For those corporations which shall be active, the Board of
Directorsrrrustees shall be elected as provided in the certificate of corporation
and bylaws of the corporation. For those corporations which shall be dormant,
the Board of Directors/l'rustees shall be the Committee on Administration of
the Presbyterian Church in America.
The Stated Clerk of the Reformed Presbyterian Church, Evangelical Synod
shall serve as an associate clerk for a period of two years. The compensation
shall be determined by the Committee on Administration on the basis of the
work load required.
b.
The staff persons serving the Reformed Presbyterian Church, Evangelical
Synod in the following positions shall be retained by the Presbyterian Church in
America permanent committees for at least one year following reception, to
wit: World Presbyterian Missions - Executive Director, Associate Director,
Financial Director, Officer Director; National Presbyterian Missions Executive Director, Director of Church Planting, Director of Development;
Board of Home Ministries - Executive Director; Christian Training
Incorporated - Executive Director; Reformed Presbyterian Foundation Executive Director. The salaries and benefits of these persons shall continue at
their present level, but no higher than the maximum salary set by the General
Assembly for their counterparts. These persons will be received without
examination by the Theological Examining Committee.
c.
Out of respect for the integrity of the Reformed Presbyterian Church,
Evangelical Synod, the approval of its acceptance of the invitation shall be
understood to honor such commitments as it may have. The ministries
presently conducted by the agencies of the Reformed Presbyterian Church,
Evangelical Synod shall be continued, subject to the review of the permanent
committees and the approval of subsequent General Assemblies.
That Covenant College and Covenant Theological Seminary shall be received as
denominational institutions under their present Articles of Incorporation and By-laws
with proposed amendments, copies of which are attached. These institutions shall be
treated in a manner similar to the Ridge Haven Conference Center, with the following
specifics:
a.
Their Boards of Trustees shall be retained as presently constituted;
b.
These institutions shall remain as separate, non-profit civil corporations;
c.
They shall be governed by their Boards of Trustees through their administrative
personnel;
d.
The General Assembly shall elect subsequent trustees through its regular
nominating process. These institutions may suggest nominations to the
presbyteries or interested commissioners may make nomination from the floor
of the General Assembly;
e.
The number and terms of the trustees shall be determined by the Articles of
Incorporation and Bylaws of the institution;
f.
The Bylaws of the General Assembly of the PCA shall be amended to allow the
Board of Trustees of these institutions to govern the institutions according to
their approved Articles of Incorporation and Bylaws;
g.
These institutions shall report annually to the General Assembly through a
Committee of Commissioners;

132

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
JOINING AND RECEIVING
These institutions shall be included annually in the General Assembly's askings
for special benevolent support. These askings shall be submitted to the local
churches along with the askings for the permanent committees although not as a
part of the General Assembly's budget for these permanent committees;
i.
Since the General Assembly is responsible for the conduct of the work which
the whole church does unitedly. the powers and activities that it has delegated
to institutions under its jurisdiction shall always be subject to review. It shall
not delegate any of its general powers beyond its own recall so as to cease to be
fully responsible for the spiritual oversight of the entire denomination.
6.
That any judicial case pending at the time of the reception of the church in a court of
original jurisdiction shall be continued in the corresponding court of the Presbyterian
Church in America which has jurisdiction of the accused. Any appeal or complaint
pending at the time of the reception shall be returned by the appellate court of the PCA
to the lower court which has jurisdiction of the appellee/respondent. In all cases the
PCA court shall treat the case as a new case timely instituted as of the date of the
reception and shall begin the process anew (de novo).
The
accuser/appellant/complainant shall have the right to prosecute the case whether or not
the trial court has present jurisdiction of the accuser/appellant/complainant.
1981, p. 107,9·50, III, 16. That the General Assembly answer Communication 6 from the
RPCES (9-1O. p. 29) with the following letter:
COMMUNICATION TO THE SYNOD OF THE REFORMED
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH. EVANGELICAL SYNOD
The Ninth General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America. meeting June 1519. 1981, Fort Lauderdale. Florida. wishes to respond to your communication regarding the
"perfecting of one church" and specifically to the perceived differences of mission philosophy
underlying the strategy and operation of the PCA's MTW and the RPCES's WPM as follows:
"Our churches are united by a common bond of doctrine which is foundational to our
missions outreach. The motivation of our program flows from commitment to the church's
obligation to fulfill the Great Commission in its fullest sense. We are bound to proclaim the
whole counsel of God and. in word and deed. demonstrate our testimony to a watching world.
It is within that spirit that we wish to answer your communication.
We appreciate your careful reading of our manual and handbook which represent the
foundation of the PCA's mission policy. We've also made available to you other working
documents which are subject to the manual and handbook. and reflect our current thinking on
many issues. These positions are constantly evaluated for they are seen as dynamic and not
static. We welcome your evaluation input as we come together in a combined program.
I.
The parameters you refer to for our PCA opening of new fields are just that -- for new
fields. The PCA is a new mission and came into being without existing fields. We of necessity
developed parameters that would focus our contribution to world evangelization.
Your fields would be accepted not as new fields. but as existing fields subject to the
same support and continued evaluative process as delineated in the MTW handbook. to which
all of our programs must be submitted.
II.
We. who hold to a common Reformed tradition. find the thought of a dichotomy
between word and deed abhorrent. Such a dichotomy must be repudiated. Our working
together in a combined quest for the extension of the kingdom of God in our world must be
rooted in the acceptance of the inexorable unity that is the true witness of Christ's Church. We
also must accept that our existing programs are fruit of our individual churches' pursuit of these
goals. Our coming together is a realization that unitedly a more perfect expression in
methodology and strategy will be possible because of our diversity within the framework of the
Reformed faith.
h.

I
II
1

I

133

PCADIGEST
JOINING AND RECEIVING
Conclusion: There is of necessity a recognition that our methodology and strategy, while rooted
in our understanding of the biblical imperatives, is also a product of our individual histories and
our interaction with the world we have confronted. We, in Mission to the World, thank God for
all that has been accomplished through the ministry of our brothers and sisters at WPM and the
OPC Foreign Mission Board.
Our cooperation together must begin, first of all, with the acceptance that we are not all
that God wants us to become; and secondly, that in many areas our understanding of our world
and God's mandate for it is imperfect. Thirdly, that our strategies and programs must be
submitted unitedly to the scrutiny of God's Word and the discipline of our brethren. Fourthly,
that our committee requests the Board of WPM and the Board of World Missions of the OPC to
send representatives to meet with it as soon as mutually convenient to begin the processes of
discussion and negotiation whose purpose will be to effect a harmonious integration of our
respective ministries.
The principles and policies of MTW have evolved out of our context as a new and
emerging mission facing a missions environment very different from that which existed at the
time of the formation of our sister missions. We will undoubtedly benefit from the perspectives
and experience that will be brought from these programs, both ecclesiastically and
missiologically.
As we progress in time, all of our strategies and programs must be submitted to the
scrutiny of God's Word in the light of changing and developing situations in the world. This
will be true of Mission to the World first and foremost, but will of necessity include others who
unite with us also. Those who join with us will be a part of this process by sharing both on the
committee and in the Assembly. Surely we have this guarantee -- that which bears the stamp of
God's blessing and seal of His Word continue and increase.
It is within this spirit that we accept wholeheartedly the ministries in which our brethren
are presently engaged, and are committed to look forward together to a more perfect
understanding of how best to meld and mold them in order that God might be glorified through
the extension of His Church worldwide."
Date:
Attest: Morton H. Smith
Stated Clerk

Corporation Form Used
1982, p. 61, 10·24, III, 5. That the following form be used for joining and receiving
RPCES Corporations if such takes place:
Now, Therefore, the presbyteries of the Reformed Presbyterian Church, Evangelical Synod have
become a part of the presbyteries of the Presbyterian Church in America. The boards
and agencies of the Reformed Presbyterian Church, Evangelical Synod, are received by
the appropriate committees and agencies of the Presbyterian Church in America.
A.
Corporations: The Presbyterian Church in America will determine that these
corporations shall be active:
"Presbyterian Church in America (a Corporation)", a corporation of the State of
Delaware; "Presbyterian Church in America Foundation, Inc.", a corporation of the
State of Georgia; "Reformed Presbyterian Foundation," a Missouri corporation; "Ridge
Haven, Inc.", a North Carolina corporation; "Covenant College", a corporation of the
State of Missouri domesticated under the laws of the State of Georgia; "Covenant
Theological Seminary", a corporation of the State of Missouri.

134

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
JOINING AND RECEMNG

II

B.

1

C.

D.

These corporations shall be merged into and become a part of the "Presbyterian
Church in America (a Corporation)": "Christian Training, Inc.", a Delaware
corporation; "World Presbyterian Missions, Inc.", a Delaware corporation; "National
Presbyterian Missions, Inc.", a Delaware corporation; "Board of Home Ministries", a
Michigan corporation; and "Reformed Presbyterian Church, Evangelical Synod", a
corporation of the State of Pennsylvania; the RPCES Pension Fund, an lllinois
Corporation.
Board of Directors: The Committee on Administration of the Presbyterian Church in
America shall serve as the Board of Directors of the corporations to be merged into the
"Presbyterian Church in America (A Corporation)" for the purpose of accomplishing
the mergers and winding up the affairs of each corporation, seeing to it that all duties,
commitments, responsibilities and obligations, fiduciary and otherwise, of the various
corporations are strictly observed.
The Reformed Presbyterian Foundation: The "Reformed Presbyterian Foundation"
shall be merged into and become a part of "Presbyterian Church in America
Foundation, Inc.", as rapidly as facts and circumstances permit The Trustees of the
Reformed Presbyterian Foundation, elected as provided in the bylaws of the corporation
and placed in classes for specific term of years, and the Board of Directors of the
Presbyterian Church in America Foundation, Inc. elected by the General Assembly
shall constitute the Board of Directors of the Reformed Presbyterian Foundation during
the interim period. Any rule of the PCA, which might prevent a trustee of the
Reformed Presbyterian Foundation from serving as a member of the Board of
DirectorsITrustees of the Reformed Presbyterian Foundation, or as a member of the
Board of the PCA Foundation, Inc., is suspended for a period of two years.

Covenant College and Covenant Theological Seminary:

These educational institutions are authorized to operate and to be governed pursuant to
their newly amended bylaws and/or articles of incorporation during the coming year,
and the Committee on Administration is directed to prepare amendments to the bylaws
of the General Assembly of the PCA to conform to the new bylaws and/or articles of
incorporation of these institutions.
1982, p. 19, 10-2. Mr. Jussely yielded the floor to TE Paul G. Settle, Chairman of the AdInterim Committee on Interchurch Relations. He announced the results of the final vote of the
General Syncx:f of the RPCES on the proposed joining of the PCA. The vote was 322
affirmative and 90 negative, thus adopting the proposal and approving the joining and receiving
of the RPCES with the PCA. The PCA having completed its vote with the presbytery votes the
RPCES delegates (See Appendix 0, p. 322 for the report on this vote), who had been duly
certified, were declared members of this General Assembly.
TE Francis Schaeffer was the keynote speaker for the Monday afternoon session as part
of the celebration of the joining and receiving of the Reformed Presbyterian Church,
Evangelical Synod, into the Presbyterian Church in America.
Covenant College Trustees Recommendation
1982, p. 79, 10-56, III, 5. That the General Assembly hear and act favorably on the
following recommendation from the Trustees of Covenant College:
"We commit ourselves to your philosophy that men should not serve on more than one General
Assembly Level Committee. In the interim following Joining and Receiving, we would
recommend that all presently serving on more than one board or committee be able to serve out
their elected terms."
Joint Statement
(See PART V: POSmON PAPERS,Joint Statement on Joining & Receiving, pp. 411-413)

135

PCADIGEST
JOINING AND RECEIVING
Records
1982, p. 62, 10-24, III.
7.
That all the records of former RPCES presbyteries be closed as of the date of
reconstitution.
10.
That all records of RPCES Committees and Boards be deposited at Covenant Seminary
until such time as permanent arrangements can be made.
SUNDAY OF RECOGNITION

1982, p. 63, 10-24, III, 16. That the Committee on Administration, as soon as possible,
develop an Assembly-wide Sunday of Recognition in order to engage simultaneously the people
of the churches in celebration of the enlarging of the church through "joining and receiving."
[Clerk's note: The Committee on Administration designated the first Sunday of October, 1982,
as the date for this celebration.]

JUDICIAL BUSI~
(See CONSTITUTIONAL BUSINESS COMMITIEE)

JUDICIAL CASES
(SeePARTID)

JUDICIAL COMMISSIONS
APPOINTMENT OF

(See PART IT: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCO 15-2, 1986, 14-44)
EFFECr OF REFERENCE
(See PART IT: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCD 41-3, 1984, 12-53,

52)
MANUAL

(See PART IV: BYLAWS, MANUALS AND GUIDELINES, Standing Judicial

Commission Manual)
REVIEW OF JUDICIAL PROCEDURES

1993, p. 121, 21-56, III, 6. That Overture 8, from Southwest Florida be answered by
recommending that the General Assembly establish an Ad Interim Committee on Judicial
Procedures to review our current General Assembly judicial procedures, evaluating their
comparative strengths and weaknesses. Said study committee shall report to the 22d General
Assembly the results of its findings, complete with recommendations, if any, for further
perfection of our judicial procedures.
Adopted
STANDING JUDICIAL COMMI~ION

(See STANDING JUDICIAL COMMISSION)
TEMPOItARY GUIDEUNFS

[Note: Temporary Guidelines were adopted in 1983, 11-21,28, p. 73. However, see PART IV:
BYLAWS, MANUALS AND GUIDELINES, Standing Judicial Commission Manual for
current guidelines.]

136

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
MEN OF THE COVENANT
KOREAN LANGUAGE PRESBYTERIFS
(See PRESBYTERY, KOREAN LANGUAGE PRESBYTERIES)
LEGAL AUDIT
1992, p. 135, 20-63, VI.
JO.
That the 20th General Assembly require all committees and agencies to participate in
the Legal Audit Questionnaire.
31.
That the 20th General Assembly direct the completion of a Representative Legal Audit
Analysis for the peA, the cost not to exceed $17,398, which is to be divided equally
among the ten committees and agencies. Further, if adopted, that the budgets for
committees and agencies be adjusted accordingly.
32.
That the 20th General Assembly direct the completion of an on-site representative field
legal audit contingent on obtaining designated funding through PCA Foundation or
otherwise. The cost is approximately $10,000.
1993, p. 86,21-38, III, 21. That the Legal Audit be referred to the 22nd GA (the audit was
not made available to the CtC for review because it had not yet been reviewed by CMTW).
Adopted
1993, p. 181,21-64, III, 31a. That the AC be directed to assemble the recommendations in
and response to the Legal Audit by the various committees, boards, and agencies and to present
such reports through the appropriate committees, boards, and agencies to the 22nd GA, and that
the parts of the Legal Audit referred to each committee, board, and agency be made available to
the Committee of Commissioners reviewing its work at the 22nd General Assembly and that the
entire legal audit and responses be made available to the Committee of Commissioners on AC
at the 22nd General Assembly.
Adopted
LICENSURE
(See MINISTER, PREPARATION FOR THE MINISTRY)
MARRIAGE
1991, p. 63, 19-16,7.
In light of the current focus on sexuality and the public confusion generated through the
recent controversy on that subject within the Presbyterian Church (USA), the Presbyterian
Church in America (PCA) , a distinctly different denomination, strongly reaffirms its
commitment to the Bible's teaching on sex and marriage.
The PCA reaffirms that sex is a gift from God which should be expressed only in
marriage between a man and a woman. Therefore all sexual intercourse outside marriage,
including homosexuality and lesbianism, is contrary to God's Word (the Bible), and is sin. We
acknowledge that the Bible declares that those who continuously and unrepentantly sin shall not
inherit the kingdom of God, and we sorrow for their plight. Yet we also joyfully acknowledge
that God in the gospel of Jesus Christ forgives repentant sinners and welcomes such forgiven,
cleansed and changed sinners into the Church of Jesus Christ (1 Corinthians 6:9-11)." (See
Divorce and Remarriage, 1992)
MEN OF THE COVENANT
1973, p. 58,1-77.
9.
That each congregation be encouraged to promote a local Men's organization with a
distinctly spiritual emphasis, to be known as "Men of Covenant".
10.
That each Presbytery be encouraged to hold a Spring Rally for men.

137

PCADIGEST
MEN OF THE COVENANT
11.

That the Assembly's Christian Education Committee be authorized to begin plans for an
Assembly-wide Men's Convention in 1975.
1975, p. 88, 3-75, B.
1.
That the General Assembly officially designate PCA men's ministries by the title MEN
OF THE COVENANT.
2.
That the General Assembly approve the general concept of Men of the Covenant
ministries contained in this report and recommend it to the presbyteries and sessions for
their consideration.
3.
That the General Assembly approve the establishment of a Men of the Covenant
Advisory Subcommittee of the Committee for Christian Education and Publications,
whose members shall be appointed by the Committee for Christian Education and
Publications.
1976, p. 84, 4-80, 10. That local churches and presbyteries be encouraged to consider the
establishment of Men of the Covenant organizations in 1977.
1990, p. 99, 18-34, III, 6. That in our efforts to mobilize the laity for ministry and to
develop a greater sense of support of the PCA's fellowship and ministry, through its CEIP
Committee the Assembly encourage the organization of the Presbytery Men of the Covenant
(approved 1973 and 1974) utilizing the resources of these presbyteries with a present MOC
working with CEIP.
1993, p. 74,21-24, III, 4. That local churches and presbyteries be encouraged to develop a
Men of the Covenant program ministry and the Men of the Covenant guide distributed to all the
churches be considered as a beginning point.
Adopted
MERCY MINISTRY
(See DIACONAL MINISTRIES; PART V: POSmON PAPERS, Diaconal Ministries, pp.
159-181; Mercy Ministry, Biblical Guidelines, pp. 414-428)
MESSAGE TO ALL CHURCHES
(See PART V: POSmON PAPERS, Message to All Churches, pp. 7-14)
MESSENGER
(See also GENERAL ASSEMBLY, PUBUCATION OF ASSEMBLY ACflONS)
1973, p. 57, 1-77, 6. That a printed publication containing news of interest to the
denomination be published on a regular schedule, the policy of this publication to be the
presentation of news only, without editorializing.
1975, p. 92, 3-77, C, 2. That Overtures #12 and #13 from Mississippi Valley Presbytery
and Westminster Presbytery, respectively, be answered by instructing the Permanent Committee
for Christian Education and Publications to take the matter of a denominational magazine under
advisement until the next General Assembly, at which time a specific recommendation shall be
made.
1976, p. 85,4-80, 15. That in conformity with the instructions contained in Resolution no.
15 of the Third General Assembly, the General Assembly remind each of the Committees of the
necessity of publishing dates of all committee meetings at least 30 days in advance of such
meetings and that such publication be in "Continuing... ", or in the proposed denominational
magazine.

138

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
MESSENGER

Ij

A.

J

I
B.
C.

D.
E.
F.

1976, p. 85,4-80,16.
That the General Assembly adopt the following procedure in phasing the present
"Continuing ... " into a denominational magazine:
1.
News Content - the primary purpose of the magazine shall be to provide news
of the denomination concerning the work of the major committees, the
presbyteries and churches.
2.
Editorial Policy - the magazine shall contain no purely editorial material.
3.
Specific Features - space shall be devoted regularly to the following features:
a.
Family Section: including a Bible study suitable for family devotions.
b.
Discussion: pro and con on issues currently \Dlder study by any
committee of the church.
c.
Theological Section:
devoted only to studies in areas already
recognized by the denomination (e.g. the Westminster Standards, Book
of Church Order, etc.).
d.
Leadership Section: designed especially for training officers in the
church.
e.
Feature Section:
containing articles on music, book reviews,
specialized ministries, biographies.
4.
Advertising - directory-type advertising shall be included for approved
Christian enterprises and for churches and individuals in the PCA.
5.
Size, Layout, Frequency - the magazine shall be published monthly on 6" x 9"
stock and shall contain suitable art work and photographs.
The Committee for Christian Education and Publications shall bring a full mock-up of
the proposed magazine to the Fifth General Assembly.
$10,000 shall be added to the Christian Education budget for the purpose of developing
the mock-up and the Christian Education staff shall be permitted to cancel one or two
issues of "Continuing ... " in order to prepare the mock-up.
Plans shall be presented to the Fifth General Assembly to begin publishing the
magazine on January 1, 1978, contingent upon appropriate financial capability.
An Assistant Coordinator for Publications shall be presented to the Fifth General
Assembly for examination and approval.
That the amount of $25,000 be added for the purpose of hiring appropriate editorial

personnel.
1977, p. 77, 5-72, III, 18. That the Committee on CE/P be authorized to publish a
bimonthly denominational magazine, The PCA Messenger, based on the design approved at the
Fourth General Assembly, and as viewed in two mock-up editions published during the summer
of 1977.
1978, p. 85, 6-75, III, 6. That the General Assembly approve the monthly publication of
the PCA Messenger, beginning in September, in accordance with the original plan adopted by
the Fourth General Assembly (ct. Minutes, p. 85, No. 16) except that the Committee may
exercise its best judgment with respect to the format, method of printing or reproduction, and
manner of handling distribution, including the possibility of a small subscription charge, where
such is deemed necessary or advisable in order to effect a reduction in the expense involved.
1979, p. 139,7-90,24. That because of the need for congregations to understand as quickly
and as fully as possible what the Seventh General Assembly has accomplished, and, because of
the difficulty even commissioners have in accurately assimilating, recalling and documenting
major decisions of the Assembly as they report to coogregations, and as sessions attempt to
follow the lead of the General Assembly, and, because realistically, the Minutes of the General
Assembly are largely not effective in communicating to the churches the Assembly's actions
due to their detailed treatment, therefore, the information be presented in the earliest issue of the
Messenger rather than directly by the Stated Clerk.

139

PCADIGEST
MESSENGER
1980, p. 73, 8-29, III, 23. That all pennanent committees and sub-committees of the
General Assembly be encouraged to use "The PCA Messenger" as the Denomination's official
news organ to keep the constituents informed as to the news and development within the PCA.
1982, p. 65, 10-31, III, 11. That due to the rapidly rising cost of printing and mailing. the
CEIP Committee be authorized to explore and implement alternatives for financing the
publication and distribution of the denominational magazine. The PCA Messenger.
1982, p. 65, 10-31, III, 12. That in light of the defined purpose of the Messenger in its
attempt to present the whole news of the PCA, prayer is requested on behalf of the committee
and staff for this essential ministry.
1982, p. 117, 10-90, III, 16. That the General Assembly instruct the PCA Business
Administrator to pay for the total printing and postal cost of the Messenger out of the total of
undesignated funds given to the General Assembly each month prior to percentage distribution
of those funds to the Pennanent Committees. This shall begin immediately. It should be
understood that oversight of the Messenger will remain with CFJP. However. all Boards and
Committees of the PCA are requested to use the Messenger as a vehicle for their publications
and news announcements, when possible.
1983, p. 131, 11-75, III, 10. That those individuals and churches receiving the PCA
Messenger (some 54,000 family units) be encouraged as they read the Messenger to be aware of
the need to uphold the Assembly's total program, committees. agencies, and staff in regular
prayer, and that the CFJP Committee be encouraged, as funding and staffing are available. to
continue to expand the magazine's design to incorporate all of the areas originally proposed in
the 1976 GA Minutes (M4GA. p. 85). (See 1976.4-80, 16, A)
1983, p. 131, 11-75, III, 12. That Overture 15 from the Tenth General Assembly be
answered in the following manner:
a.
That reference be made to the Tenth General Assembly Minutes. page 117, 10-90. Item
#16. regarding the use of the denominational magazine: ... all boards and committees of
the PCA are requested to use the Messenger as a vehicle for their publications and news
announcements. when possible.
1986, p. 146,14-67, III, 15. That the Assembly recommend that local churches continue to
encourage their members to receive and read the PCA Messenger and that prayers and financial
support for its ministry be increased in order to insure a maximum readership; that the editor
and all who work with him be commended for their work of expanding the Messenger in format
and content.
1987, p. 148, 15-66, III, 9. That in order to expand the MESSENGER in accordance with
the original assignment from the Fourth General Assembly, and as explained in the Pennanent
Committee report (Appendix D. p. 290). CE/P be authorized to include a column open to
various viewpoints expressed by the editor and others on issues before the church. and paid
advertising for evangelical and reformed programs, materials and services available to our
churches.
1987, p. 148, 15-66, III, 10. That in order to keep the church membership informed, and
challenged about the PCA's ministry at home and throughout the world, each local session
encourage its members to subscribe by January 1, 1988 to the PCA MESSENGER either
individually or by church group enrollment.
1988, p. 122, 16-33, 111,15. That whereas. The PCA MESSENGER is seeking to serve the
entire church as a vital part of the PCA's program; and,
Whereas. The PCA MESSENGER is part of the PCA's and CE/P's overall stewardship strategy
and program; and,
Whereas. the General Assembly for the last four years has given assistance to CFJP with some
of the printing and postage costs from undesignated giving; and.
Whereas. the projected subsidy needed for the next year is $120,000;

140

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
MINISTER

Therefore. CFJP requests that the General Assembly continue to allow the use of the
undesignated funds to assist with the printing and postage of The PCA MESSENGER.
to be reviewed by the 1989 Assembly.
1990. p. 100. 18-34. III. IS. "Ask Messenger not to Publish Anonymous Letters"
Whereas. the Scripture calls God's people to integrity ("Speak every man truth with his
neighbor." Eph. 4:25) and the Westminster Confession of Faith XX:iii cautions against
the practice of any sin "upon pretence of Christian liberty"; and
Whereas. the PCA Messenger has published several articles under assumed pen-names (Feb.
1990. pp 6 & 10);
Therefore. the Session of the Prosperity Presbyterian Church of Charlotte. NC. humbly requests
the Central Carolina Presbytery at its regular stated meeting on April 28. 1990. to
petition the General Assembly of the PCA to direct the Committee on Christian
Education and Publications to implement a policy by which unsigned or anonymous or
pen-named articles or editorials shall not ordinarily be published in the Messenger.
That Overture 28 from Central Carolina Presbytery be answered in the affirmative.
1991. p. 74. 111-13.
Whereas. the PeA was begun with the stated intention of being a church that is true to the
scriptures and to the Reformed Faith; and
Whereas. we have an obligation to the members of that denomination to feed them nothing but
the inspired Word of God; and
Whereas. the Messenger is a periodical which is read by many members of the denomination;
and
Whereas. in the issue of February. 1991. there was an advertisement on the back cover for a
Commentary series written by William Barclay; and
Whereas. on page 12 of the commentary on Luke. Mr. Barclay states. "The church does not
insist that we believe in this doctrine ... Now let us look at the things which may make
us wonder if the story of the Virgin Birth is to be taken as literally as all that." and
Whereas. this viewpoint would be seen a rank heresy by all the Reformed Standards upon
which the PeA was established;
Therefore. the Session of Grace Presbyterian Church. Harrisburg. North Carolina. respectfully
overtures the 19th General Assembly of the PCA to direct the Christian Education
Committee. publishers of the Messenger. to recommit themselves to the position of
guardian of the flock against the savage wolves (Acts 20:28-29). and to review and to
reject any advertisements for materials which run directly contrary to the stated doctrine
ofthePCA.

MINISfER
ASSISTANT

(See PART IT: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION. BCD 22-3. 1986. 14-52.
42)
~TE

VoCing
(See PART IT: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION. BCD 4-3. 1985. 13-45.
49)

141

PCADIGEST
MINISTER
BURN-OUT

1985. p. 123. 13-58. III. 15. That the General Assembly receive as infonnation the
excerpts from "The Church At Risk", (see Attachment F, Appendix G, p. 229) and further, that
the Assembly take seriously the problem of burn-out among PCA ministers and through
appropriate action attempt to prevent and treat this problem.
CALL

(See PART II: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCO 13-5, 1984, 12-53,
54; BCO 20-1, 1983, 11-36,55; PART III: JUDICIAL CASES, #12, #38)
CONFIDENTIAUTY

(See CONFIDENTIALITY)
CONTINUING EDUCATION

1973. p. 64. 1-82. A motion that the General Assembly recommend to each Presbytery that
it utilize one of its Committees or appoint a Committee to establish an annual theological
conference to serve its own constituency, and that this matter be referred to the Committee on
Christian Education and Publications, was referred to the Committee on Christian Education
and Publications for study and report back to the Second General Assembly.
1975. p. 90. 3-77. 13. That the General Assembly urge presbyteries to conduct conferences
for teaching Reformed theology and its implications for the life and work of the churches and
members of the PCA.
1982. p. 65. 10-31. 111.8. That the ministers and local churches be encouraged to continue
to take advantage of the training offered at the annual PCA Minister's Continuing Education
Conference.
1982. p. 65. 10-31. III. 9. That the presbyteries be encouraged to establish and finance
their own regional continuing education program for ministers, utilizing the resources and
personnel from CFJP for this training.
1986. p. 147. 14-67. 111.24. That the Assembly through the offices of the Stated Clerk and
CM urge local sessions and presbyteries to utilize the continuing education and training
programs offered by CFJP as an attempt to minister to the needs of pastors and wives, and that
CM continue to cooperate in the area of Church Growth and Revitalization with MNA as they
work in the area of church planting.
CO-PASTOR

(See also PART II: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCO 4-3,1986,1452,9)
1988. p. 170. 16-77. III. 3. BCO 23-1 amendment re co-pastors sent down to presbyteries
but defeated in 1989 (seeM17GA, p. 43,17-6, Item 3).
DIVORCE

(See PART III: JUDICIAL CASES, #3, #51, #60; PART V: POSmON PAPERS, Divorce
and Remarriage, pp. 182-292; Qualifications for Officers of a Divorced Person, pp. 292-293)
EVANGEUST

Powers of
(See PART II: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCO 8-6, 1987, 15-83,
13)

142

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
MINISTER
HONORABLY RETIRED
(See MINISTERIAL RELIEF)
MINISTERING TO

1987. p. 148. 15-66. III, 12. That, in order to assistCFJP and others involved in
ministering to our pastors and wives, the CFJP Committee urges each presbytery in the PCA, if
they have not done so, to establish a committee for the purpose of being available to encourage,
assist and counsel those involved in full time ministry.
ORGANIZING MINISTERS

(See also PART IV: BYLAWS, MANUALS AND GUIDELINES, MNA, Policy Manual)
1974, p. 79.2-104. 11. That the Church, which is authorized to call and appoint teaching
elders to labor as Pastors weD 8-3), authorize the Committee on MUS to call teaching elders to
be organizing pastors in areas not within the jurisdiction of an existing PCA Presbytery,
provided the call is approved by the teaching elder's Presbytery. WeD 22-1).
1978. p. 77. 6-51. 111.14. Overture 8
...The Central florida Presbytery requests the General Assembly to clarify which MUS
Committee, denominational or presbytery, has the final approval regarding a man's
qualifications as an organizing pastor after a work within an existing presbytery's boundary.
Answered with the following statements.
1.
That the Presbytery has final approval of a man's qualification for any call within its
boundaries.
2.
That this in no way requires the denominational MUS Committee to give any financial
support for any man without the approval of said denominational committee.
1987. p. 125, 15-60. III. 12. That the General Assembly call on MNA to continue seeking
the most experienced, qualified men from among us to be the organizing pastors of the hundreds
of new churches that will be started in the next decade.
OUT OF BOUNDS

(See PART m: JUDICIAL CASES, #2, #6)
PREPARATION FOR mE MINJSl'RY

Candidacy
(See PART II: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCD 18-2)
DUIIl Candidacy
(See PART II: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCD 18-7, 1984, 12-53,
15)
ExamilUltion
(See also PART II: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION. BCD 15-1, 1985.
13-45,47; BCD 19-2, 1986, 14-52, 19; BCD 21-4,1986, 14-52,37 & 48)
1975, p. 64, 3-46. 2. Overture 1
...The Third General Assemblyencourage[s] the presbyteries to examine candidates and
ministers in their knowledge of the Shorter Catechism and that candidates for the ministry be
informed that they will be expected to exhibit such knowledge of the content of the Shorter
Catechism.

143

PCADIGEST
MINISTER

Uniform Curriculum
(See also PART V: POsmON PAPERS, Unifonn Curriculum, pp. 557-560; Guidelines for
Theological Education, pp. 561-565)
1975, p. 57, 3-17, 13. Answer CommWlication 3 from Mississippi Valley Presbytery
calling for clarification of the requirements on Hebrew and Greek examinations, by answering
in the affinnative Overture 17 from the Presbytery of Mississippi Valley requesting the
following be added to paragraph 22-4: "A Presbytery may accept a Seminary degree which
includes study in the original languages in lieu of an oral examination in the original
languages." Add this sentence after "Church." on page 38, line 19.
1978, p. 86, 6-75, III, 13. That the Coordination and implementation plan be approved
with the following procedure:
1.
That the Committee for Christian Education and Publications be authorized to work
with the seminaries which the General Assembly endorses, toward having them help
coordinate the 3+1 or 2+2 programs with the seminaries' requirements to the end that
they would grant the Master of Divinity Degree to PCA candidates.
2.
That the General Assembly authorize the establishment of a Certification Committee
for the purpose of examining all the theological training programs operated by
presbyteries of the PCA, and to certify programs to grant certificates indicating
satisfactory completion of the Unifonn Curriculum according to approved standards.
This committee's membership is to be elected annually from presbyteries with approved
programs having at least one year of tutorial training. Presbyteries are completely
responsible for all trials relative to licensure and ordination of candidates to the Gospel
ministry. The Committee shall make an annual report to the General Assembly through
the Committee for Christian Education and Publications, indicating: 1) the degree of
unifonnity in the quality of instruction in the various presbyteries and seminaries; 2) an
assessment of the educational strengths of the program at the time the report is
prepared; 3) an assessment of the educational weaknesses of the program at the time the
report is prepared; and 4) what actions the General Assembly needs to take to safeguard
or improve the quality of the program as an effective means to prepare candidates for
the Gospel ministry.
3.
That at least 2 year's residence in approved seminaries, or approved theological study
centers with full-time resident theologian(s) be required in the approved curriculum.
(This is an initial recommendation to which the fully non-Seminary four-year tutoriaJ._
program may be added as the church matures in its ability to properly execute the
educational task.)
4.
That the Unifonn Curriculum, as adopted by the General Assembly, be undertook as
that which is intended by the words "an approved course of theological studies: as
found in 22-4 of the Book of Church Order (p. 32)."
5.
That since the purpose of training is to equip men for their task and not simply show a
record of having taken certain courses of study, an individual may request a
comprehensive examination to demonstrate his competence in any particular course of
study, which, if satisfactorily passed, may stand in lieu of studying the prescribed
material.
6.
That the Sub-Committee on Theological Education be continued for one year and that it
be authorized to give preliminary approval to presbytery training programs so that
presbyteries may be able to elect representatives to the certification committee and to
evaluate this unifonn curriculum in theological education in light of infonnation
secured from existing seminaries, theological centers, and educational models already
drawn by accrediting agencies and sister denominations.

144

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
MINISTER
1979. p. 1I3. 7-49. III.
That the Assembly's Christian Education and Publications Committee continue to act as
coordinator and liaison in the area of theological training.
17.
That the presbyteries assign the oversight of the theological training program to their
Christian Education Committee and the membership candidates committee, jointly
working in this area.
18.
That each presbytery examine its resources available to carry out the obligations of
ministerial training. Such resources should take into account teaching elders, ruling
elders, knowledgeable laymen in certain areas, and institutions.
19.
That each presbytery consider either a 3+1 program or a 2+2 program and coocentrate
on its development initially.
20.
That each presbytery prepare a general plan of theological training for its candidates
plus a specific plan for each individual that takes into account the candidate's previous
background, training, etc.; and that the plans be submitted to the Certification
(Accrediting) Committee for Approval.
1980. p. 73. 8-29. III. 16. That the General Assembly direct the presbyteries to continue to
develop their plans of education for ministerial candidates following the suggestions and
guidelines contained in the Minutes of the Seventh General AssemblY, pp. 189-190.
1981. p. 91. 9-36. 111.13.
a.
The 3+1 and 2+2 methods had to be considered "Optional" until the necessary
amendments were made to the Book of Church Order.
b.
The intention of this Committee (and the expressed intention by this Committee before
the General Assembly) has always been that the Uniform Curriculum program
eventually be the normal, approved method of ministerial training.
c.
The "one year of tutorial training" fits within the Uniform Curriculum as the "year of
licensure." (They are the same under the Uniform Curriculum.)
It has never been intended or expressed that the Certificatioo Corrunittee should require
d.
a specific plan for each individual candidate; rather, it has been this Committee's
intention that Presbyteries - in accordance with the enactment of the Uniform
Curriculum - descnre in detail to the Certification Committee how they plan to carry
out either the 3+1 or 2+2 plan (or both).
Definitions:
a.
3+ 1 -- Attendance at a standard seminary for academic training with the fourth year
required to complete practical training by tutorial study under men from the PeA on
presbytery levels. An intern year would be accepted in lieu of the fourth year tutorial.
b.
2+2 -- Two year program in a standard seminary and/or regional seminary or by a
carefully outlined program of self-study for a two year period under the tutelage of
qualified ministers of the PCA. The candidate would then enter into a concentrated two
year study in the area of practical theology. It should be noted that this plan does not
require seminary attendance (pp. 151-152,1977 Minutes).
c.
3 -- Attendance at a standard seminary for academic training leading to a theological
degree. One year of licensure may be completed concurrently within this three year
academic program.
d.
Tutorial Training -- Tutorial training is directed study by a presbytery for the purpose of
insuring that a candidate's academic training conforms to the Uniform Curriculum.
1982. p. 65. 10-31. III. 10. That each presbytery be reminded of the constitutional
requirement for an Assembly-approved program of theological education for each person
entering training after June, 1981, and that the presbytery plan be submitted to the Certification
Committee for approval by January 1, 1983.
16.

145

PCADIGEST
MINISTER

Internship
(See also PART II: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCO 19-7, 1988,
16-77,9; PART IV: BYLAWS, MANUALS AND GUIDELINES, MNA, Policy Manual)
1979, p. 102, 7-41, III, 8. That answer 6 (p. 180)"10 James D. Hatch regarding a resolution
of Evangel Presbytery calling for a fourth year of training to complete a ministerial candidate's
study be approved.
The Committee answered the questions as follows:
1.
With regard to the first question as to whether the resolution is in conflict with any
provisions of the Book of Church Order, BCO 19-1 requires the Presbytery to take
control of a candidate's training, and the resolution in question is not in conflict with the

BCO.
2.

3.

4.

5.

In answer to the second question, the resolution would fulfill the spirit of the General
Assembly actions on training of ministers.
With regard to the problem stated in the third paragraph of the letter, the resolution
should not apply to anyone who is currently a candidate, but that any incoming
candidate be advised of the requirement for an additional year of preparation. (See
proposed changes to the BCO found in the Minutes of the Sixth General Assembly,
pages 115-119.)
With regard to the pa§Sible conflict between Presbyteries, Presbyteries will have to
handle each case on an individual basis during the transitional period.
With regard to other observations or suggestions, it is suggested that Presbyteries do not
go too far ahead of the actions of the General Assembly on this matter.

Certiflcadon Committee
1985, p. 88, 13-30, III, 20. That...The Thirteenth General Assembly, meeting in St. Louis,
Missouri, June 1985, restructure the Committee on Certification as follows:
1.
Those presbyteries having had a plan for internship approved shall be represented on
the Committee on Certification;
2.
Presbyteries shall elect their own representatives for a four-year term of office;
3.
The Committee on Christian Education and Publications be instructed to develop a plan
for changing the membership of the Committee on Certification into a three-class
arrangement, with each class to serve four years, with no alternates being needed;
4.
These plans be forwarded to the presbyteries by the end of October 1985, so that
presbytery action can be taken in time for the restructuring to be in place by the
February 1986 meeting of the Committee on Certification.
1985, p. 107, 13-45, III, 45. That the advice regarding Constitutional Inquiry 3 (p. 239
I.D.3) be ratified as amended.
Is it an optional item or is it a requirement for presbyteries to submit a plan to the Certification
Committee for its approval?
Answer: The action of the General Assembly in this matter was to adopt the following: "That
each presbytery prepare a general plan of theological training for its candidates, plus a specific
plan for each individual that takes into account the candidate's previous background, training,
etc., and that the plans be submitted to the Certification (Accrediting) Committee for approval. "
CM7GA, p.113, Recommendation 20)
1.
General Assembly directed the presbyteries to submit their plan for approval and,
therefore, compliance was not optional.
2.
The Tennessee Valley Presbytery has raised a valid question concerning the
constitutionality of the original General Assembly requirement of approval by a
committee, which seems to impinge upon the rights of Presbytery.
The weight to be given to the actions of previous assemblies is presently being studied
by the Committee on Judicial Business.

146

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
MINISTER

Cooperati,e Agreements
1984, p. 142, 12-53, II, 68. That the General Assembly approve the use of cooperative
arrangements between Presbyteries for the internship program in principle and that the matter
be referred to the Permanent Committee on Judicial Business, in consultation with the
Certification Committee to perfect language for the amendment of BCD 19.

Financilll Support
1983, p. 75, 11-24, II, 12. That the General Assembly and the Presbyteries review the
internship program, reporting through the Committee on Christian Education, specifically
considering the three year concurrent model in light of the candidate's need for financial support
while serving in churches to fulfill ordination requirements, of the fact that many opportunities
for internships and pastoral calls tend to come from presbyteries other than the one of a
candidate's care, and of the tendency for certain presbyteries to have a disproportionate number
of candidates under their care, and that Covenant Theological Seminary be included in the
continuing deliberation on the internship program.
1983, p. 132,11-75, 111,19. That the General Assembly strongly challenge the presbyteries
to accept their financial responsibilities to participants in the mandatory internship program so
that the participants may devote themselves fully to the benefits of this program in terms of their
readiness for the ministry.

GrandfaJher Clause
(See also PART II: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCD 24-9)
1983, p. 132, 11-75, III, 18. That since the General Assembly, in its adoption of the
requirement for one year of mandatory licensure under the supervision of the presbyteries, did
expressly establish a "grandfather clause" exempting those candidates who were already under
process under the previous requirements and did allow the presbyteries two years to develop the
required programs for supervision, this same procedure be followed in regard to those
candidates, who were in process under the supervision of the RPCES and those presbyteries
created by Joining and Receiving.

Moring to Field
(See PART II: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCD 21-1-2, 1987, 1583,21)

Plans for Internship
1980, p. 73, 8-29, III, 16. That the General Assembly direct the presbyteries to continue to
develop their plans of education for ministerial candidates following the suggestions and
guidelines contained in the Minutes ofthe Seventh General AssemblY, pp. 189-190.
Licensure
(See also PART II: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCD 19-2, 1988,
16-77, 9;.PART ffi: JUDICIAL CASES, 134)
1987, p. 172, 15-83, 111,16. That the Assembly adopt the following:
"Licensure is defined in BCD 19-1 as permission to preach on a regular basis after
examination. The purpose of licensure is to preserve the purity of the preaching of the Gospel.
Ordination, on the other hand, invests a man with the full authority of the office of
teaching elder (}JeD, Preface II (3) and Chapter 8).

147

\

PCADIGEST
MINISTER
We recognize that historically there may have been differences in application of these
provisions. In one area of the church, particularly prior to the internship program, it was
commoo to accept all of the licensure examination as a part of the ordination examination,
either on the same day or within a very short space of time. In other parts of the church,
licensure has been seen as a very preliminary step or a part of a testing procedure which might
or might not lead to ordination.
It should be emphasized that two different examinations are required for licensure and
ordination. The scope of the licensure examination may be, and usually is, less thorough and
comprehensive than that for ordination, though all parts of the licensure examination must be
covered, except in extraordinary cases (JJCO 19-2). This is reflected in BCO 19-2 (B) (1) and
(3), where it is stated that only "basic" knowledge of Biblical doctrine and church government is
required.
By way of contrast, BCO 21-4 specifically states that trials for ordination shall consist
of a "careful" examination in all parts.
However, it is also true that BCO 21-4 allows a Presbytery to accept all or any parts of
the licensure examination as satisfying the corresponding parts of the ordination examination, if
it is satisfied that the examination given at the licensure level meets the requirement of a
"careful examination." The determination of what constitutes "basic" knowledge and what
constitutes a "careful examination" is one which must be left to Presbytery to decide in each
case, subject to review and control or judicial process.
It is clear, therefore, that a higher standard is required for the ordination, examination
than for the licensure examination and Presbyteries are expected to ensure that this distinction is
maintained. No changes in the BCO are required. "

Ordinadon
(See also CONFESSIONAL SUBSCRIPTION; PART II: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE
CONSTITUTION, BCO 21-4, BCO 21-5; PART ill: JUDICIAL CASES, #2, #6)
1978, p. 123,6-116, IV, B. That Presbyteries be reminded that according to BCO ALL
applicants for ordination must be candidates under care of Presbytery first, and that ALL MEN
coming into the Presbytery must be examined whether or not they have been members in that
Presbytery before.
1985, p. 47,13-3. Overture 17: From the Presbytery of Missouri
Whereas, questions have been raised about exceptions to the Book of Church Order; and
Whereas, the 1984 General Assembly began to formulate answers to this question on the floor
by adopting two separate motions,
(1)
the first of which indicated that exceptions to the BCO are to be handled in a
different manner from exceptions to the Confession of Faith because Ordination
Question 3 asks "merely" approval of the form of government and discipline,
and
(2)
the second of which indicated that exceptions to the BCO dealing with a matter
spoken to in the Westminster Confession or Catechism shall be dealt with as
exceptions to the Confession or Catechisms; and
Whereas, these motions did not directly address the heart of the Ordination Question 3 (BCO
21-5), namely, "the general principles of Biblical polity" which are not dealt with in
11re Confession of Faith or Catechism;
Therefore, be it resolved that the answers of these two adopted motions be further clarified by
the addition to these motions of the following motion:
"Further, when an exception to the BCO is dealing with a matter that is itself one of the
'general principles of Biblical polity,' the exception shall be dealt with as the presbytery
deals with an exception to the Westminster Confession of Faith or Catechisms."

148

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
MINISTER
1985, p. 107, 13-45, III, 42. That Overture 17 be adopted and that the Stated Oerk be
instructed to print the entirety of the following material together in this year's Minutes as the
statement of the GA on the matter. (Paragraph 1 is from M12GA, p. 166; Paragraph 2 is from
the language of the overture.)
Ordination Question 3, (PCO 21-5) asks merely "Do you approve of the form of
government and discipline of the Presbyterian Church in America, in conformity with the
general principles of Biblical polity?" Whereas, Ordinatioo Questioo 2 aslcs concerning our
doctrinal standards "Do you sincerely receive and adopt the Confession of Faith and Catechisms
of this church as containing the system of doctrine taught in the Holy Saiptures; and do you
further promise that if at any time you fmd yourself out of accord with any of the fundamentals
of this system of doctrine, you will 00 your own initiative, make known to your presbytery the
change which has taken place in your views since the assumption of this ordination vow?"
When an exceptioo to the BCO is dealing with a matter spoken to in the Westminster
Confession of Faith and Catechisms of this church, the exception shall be dealt with as an
exception to the Westminster Confession of Faith or Catechisms of this church. (M12GA, 12-83,

p.I66)
Further, when an exception to the BCO is dealing with a matter that is itself one of the
"general principles of Biblical polity", the exceptioo shall be dealt with as the presbytery deals
with an exception to the Westminster Confession of Faith or Catechisms (see Westminster
Confession of Faith, I, X: "The supreme judge by which all controversies of religion are to be
determined, and all decrees of councils, opinions of ancient writers, doctrines of men, and
private spirits, are to be examined, and in whose sentence we are to rest, can be no other but the
Holy Spirit speaking in the Scripture. ").

Extraordinary Clause
(See also PART IT: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCO 13-6,1985,
13-45, 56;BCO 19-2,1988,16-77, 9;BCO 21-4; PARTID:JUDICIALCASES,#l1)
1976, p. 72, 4-71, III, D. The Committee on Judicial Business was asked by the Tennessee
Valley Presbytery to give an interpretation and its advice regarding the application of the
"Extraordinary Oause." The Committee gives the following opinion that each Presbytery has
the right and responsibility to interpret the "Extraordinary Clause" for itself and its action in no
way binds the action of any other Presbytery.
1981, p. 122,9-65, III, E. That the question, " What is the proper use of the extraordinary
clause?," referred to the Sub-committee on Judicial Business by the Eighth General Assembly
(M8GA, 8-36), be answered with the following counsel:
The General Assembly recognizes that the use of the extraordinary clause is left to the
discretion of an individual presbytery subject to review of the General Assembly and to
the process provided for in a complaint. The General Assembly declares that the use of
the extraordinary clause should be limited to extraordinary circumstances of the church
or proven extraordinary gifts of the man. The Assembly would take notice, however,
that there has been an increasing laxity in the application of the clause. The Assembly
would, therefore, counsel that presbyteries exercise diligence and care in the use of this
provision in order that they not prevent the ordination of a candidate for whom there are
truly exceptional circumstances nor ordain a person who is inadequately prepared for
the ministry.

149

PCADIGEST
MINISTER
RELOCATION OF

1985, p. 113, 13-49, III, 9. That this recommendation be presented in two (2) parts based
on the plan submitted by the Pennanent Committee on MNA (See Appendix J, p. 257).
1985, p. 257, Appendix J, Attachment A.
Stage One
1.
Make available through the General Assembly Office of the Stated Clerk a printout of
vacant churches.
2.
Use the Office of the Stated Clerk to send the data form of any minister requested by
any church (provided it is on file) or of any minister who requests that his data fonn be
sent to a particular church.
3.
Authorize the Office of the Stated Clerk to prepare and distribute a manual to assist
churches seeking a minister and ministers seeking a new call.
4.
Request the Assembly's Stated Clerk to enlist the assistance of all the presbyteries'
stated clerks in helping both churches seeking ministers and ministers seeking new
calls. This will be accomplished primarily by a prompt notification of the Office of
Stated Clerk of ministers who are seeking calls and churches who are seeking to fill a
staff position.
5.
Provide an office at the General Assembly, staffed by a secretary from the Office of the
Stated Clerk, where ministers seeking calls and churches seeking to fill a staff position
can be helped to get to meet and know each other.
Stage Two
1.
Through a committee (Office of the Stated Clerk) appointed by the Moderator of the
General Assembly, seek a minimum fund of $100,000 to establish the office of
"Coordinator of Vocation" .
2.
Employ a Coordinator of Vocation to set up an office in the denomination's common
office space, which will serve as a central clearing house for churches, institutions, and
GA committees seeking to fill staff positions and ministers seeking a staff position with
a church, institution, or committee of the denomination.
3.
Fund this office (after the initial donations) through gifts from churches, institutions,
and committees of the denomination; and from ministers who seek the services of the
office. (Institutions, offices, and churches of over 501 members $200. Churches of
201-500 members - $100. Churches of fewer than 200 members - $50. Ministers who
file their data fonn or update it - $25).
4.
Through the Office of Coordinator of Vocation (Office of the Stated Clerk), a profile
will be developed and entered into a computer for each church seeking to fill a staff
position and for each minister seeking a new call. After that, computer match-ups will
be made available to churches and ministers who will be free to correspond with
whomever they may desire.
5.
When funds are available (see 3), the Coordinator [of Insurance, Annuity and Relief]
will employ a counselor to worlc with both the churches and ministers in helping them
to overcome situations or attitudes which have created difficulties in developing a
fruitful ministry.
REMARRIAGE

(See PART m: JUDICIAL CASES, #3, #51, #60; PART V: POSmON PAPERS, Divorce
and Remarriage, pp. 182-292; Qualifications for Officers of a Divorced Person, pp. 292-293)

150

ASSEMBLY ACI10NS
MINISTER
RESTORATION AfTER DIVESTITURE

(See alsoBCO 37-5 and 37-9)
1993, p. 138, 21-56, III, 16. "Amend BCO 34-10 to Permit Ministers Divested Without
Censure to be Re-admitted"
...answered in the negative, with the following grounds:
Adopted
Grounds:
a.
The current provisions of the BCO provide a functional process for divestiture and reentry into the ministry.
b.
The overture assumes that the ordination of a man who is divested without censure is
somehow merely "suspended" and may be reinstated, when in fact a divested man has
no ordination.
c.
The first part of the overture largely repeats the current BCO 46-8. We understand that
under this provision a minister divested without censure becomes a member in good
standing in a local church, and therefore able to hold office and to enjoy any normal
rights and privileges of church membership.
d.
A man who has served as a teaching elder, though he was divested (albeit in a nonjudicial manner), will easily meet most ordinary BCO requirements for ordination (Le.,
he has been a candidate and an intern, he has met the educational requirements, etc.).
We believe that passing an examination as to his call to the ministry and of the matters
noted in BCO 21-4 would be all that is necessary under the current system for reordination.
e.
We believe that a presbytery should have the right, as per current BCO 38-2, to divest
without censure a man who is not fully satisfied in his own mind of his call to the
ministry. We believe such a man, again pursuing the ministry, should be examined as
to his sense of call in accordance with the procedure described in BCO 21-4 (not BCO
13-6).
We note that BCO 34-10 does not require a Presbytery either to institute
judicial procedure or divest without censure (in fact such divestiture requires a special
2/3 vote).
BCO 13-2 merely requires that the Presbytery follow BCO 34-10 in the event
that a man is without a call for three years. There is therefore no requirement that a
man without a call for three or more years be divested.
f.
This does not delineate the procedure to be followed in the event of a call to another
Presbytery.
SALARY

1987. p. 153, 15-68, III. 15. That the General Assembly urge PCA churches, presbyteries,
committees, and agencies to use the PCA MINISTER'S COMPENSATION WORKSHEET
(supplied at no charge by the IAR office) to spell out salary, benefits, and professional
expenses, and that the term "TOTAL PACKAGE" no longer be used.
STATUS CHANGE

1978. p. 40, 6-11, B, 20. Reference 1
That the Sixth General Assembly advise Grace Presbytery that Mr. Snapp's Resolution is
constitutional in that any particular presbytery may determine to receive or dismiss ministers
only at regular stated meetings at its pleasure.
Grounds: Pro re nata meetings ordinarily are used to accommodate emergency conditions
(JJCO 14-9).
TRANSFERRING FROM ANOTHER DENOMINATION

(See also PART II: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCO 13-6, 1985,
13-45.56; 1979.7-41.21; BCO 21-4.1986.14-52.48; BCO 38-3,1987,15-83.8)

I
\

\

151

PCADIGEST

MINISTERIAL RELIEF
(See also GENERAL ASSEMBLY, FINANCIAL POUCIES, Expenses, Retired Ministers)
CHRISTMAS GIFI'

1973, p. 55, 1-72, 12. That the General Assembly establishes an annual offering to be
received during the Christmas Season for ministerial relief. (This is the continuation of that
offering known among some us as the Joy Gift.)
1974, p. 52, 2-63, C.
2.
We recommend that an offering to be known as the Christmas Gift for Ministerial
Relief be received to help supplement the retirement needs of ministers and their
families of the National Presbyterian Church.
3.
We recommend that 80% of the funds received in the Ministerial Relief Offering for the
first five years of our church's life be set aside as a reserve fund against future needs for
both retired ministers and their dependents.
4.
We recommend that the Ministerial Relief Funds provide that the retired ministers of
the National Presbyterian Church receive a minimum income of not less than $4,800
per year for couples and $3,300 per year for single persons, all regular income being
considered.
5.
We recommend that Ministerial Relief Funds be used to pay the premiums for the
health insurance and to reimburse the cost of Medicare Part B for the retired ministers
of the National Presbyterian Church, and their dependents.
1974, p. 83, 2-106, IV, 19. That the cost of promoting the Christmas gift for ministerial
relief be paid out of the ministerial relief fund.
1977, p. 139, Appendix C, III. The rust General Assembly authorized "an annual offering
to be received during the Christmas Season for Ministerial Relief." 1-72 (12)
The Assembly has not directed how the funds should be spent. Some suggested
policies have been drawn up to provide a basis for assembly action on this matter. They are:
1.
Ministerial Relief Funds are discretionary funds to assist the personnel of the
Presbyterian Church in America who are eligible under Guidelines adopted by the
Trustees of the Insurance and Annuity Fund, where their regular income is insufficient
to meet minimum or emergency needs.
2.
The Trustees have full authority to distribute these funm WIder Guidelines which they
adopt, as resources allow and needs arise from time to time, at their discretion.
3.
Relief Funds will be used to provide Medical insurance coverage for retired ministers
and lay workers, to assist in emergency situations, and to supplement income of retired
personnel and their families when needed.
4.
The trustees, within their discretion, may require evidence that the employee has made
suitable efforts to provide for his retirement needs. Ordinarily participation in an
Annuity Plan of the Presbyterian Church in America will answer this requirement.
Other plans will be considered on a case by case basis.
5.
An annual report shall be made to the General Assembly of the use of the funds, with
great discretion so that the dignity of those receiving aid is protected.
1981, p. 111, 9-55, III, 2. That the General Assembly strongly encourage all nonparticipating congregations to support the annual "Christmas Gift" funding relief activities.
[Note: Reaffumed in succeeding years.]
COORDINATOR

1985, p. 123, 13-58, III, 16. That the General Assembly approve the establishment of an
IAR staff position of Coordinator of Ministerial Relief to work with the presbyteries to better
facilitate ministerial relief activities at the local level and as a first step in addressing some of
the concerns expressed in the research report (see MINISTER, Burn-out, 1985, 13-58), and that
the IAR director be urged to coordinate his ministry with the staff of CFJP.

152

f .

."

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
MISSION TO NORTH AMERICA
MINISTER'S WIVES
1981, p. 90, 9·36, III, 6. That the Assembly urge presbyteries to provide conferences for
ministers' wives on a presbytery-wide or regional basis.

MISCARRIAGE
1984, p. 102, 12·31, 111,3. Overture 14
Whereas. the Presbyterian Church in America, in conformity with the teaching of Scripture. has
affinned that human life begins at conception and continues both before and after birth
(Report of the Ad Interim Committee on Abortion. adopted by the Sixth General
Assembly); and
Whereas. miscarriage. as well as abortion. most often results in the death of a human being; and
Whereas. the loss of the life of an unborn child by miscarriage is often a defmite source of grief
and sorrow to the parents of the child; and
Whereas. funeral and memorial services are regularly conducted for the worship of God and the
consolation of the living at the death of a loved one; and
Whereas. it has not generally been the practice in our churches to conduct memorial services at
the time of miscarriages in which there are no physical remains of the child to be
buried; and
Whereas. this issue which has long been neglected by the Church of Christ and which now.
more than ever. should be addressed by the church in the light of Scripture;
Therefore. Westminster Presbytery respectfully overtures the Twelfth General Assembly to
adopt the following statement: "In view of the Biblical teaching that life begins at
conception. a memorial service. given to the glory of God and for the comfort of the
bereaved. is Biblical and appropriate in regard to miscarriage regardless of the existence
of physical remains available for burial. "

MISSION OF THE CHURCH
1975, p. 89, 3·76. That the Presbyterian Church in America reaffinn the Commitment to
the Preaching of the Gospel. and inviting lost men to· the Lord Jesus by public confession of
faith.
1976, p. 53,4-18. The Fourth General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America
reaffinns its commitment to the Great Commission.

MISSION TO NORTH AMERICA (MNA)
ARMY OF INTERCFSSORS PRAYER PROJECI'

1993, p. 91, 21-41, III, 6. That. because of the continued need of God's intervention and
blessing on all the ministries of Mission to North America toward the accomplishment of
Vision 2000. the General Assembly reaffinn its dependence upon Almighty God for the growth
and health of the PeA and urge congregations to continue to participate in the Army of

Intercessors Prayer Project.

Adopted

ASSFS9dENT CENTER

1990, p. 134,18·56, 111,17. That the 18th General Assembly receive the response of MNA
to Recommendation 27 from 17th General Assembly CMI7GA. 17-56.
27. p. 99). to wit:
Communication 19 Personal Resolution from RE Dale White "Manual on MNA Assessments"
that the permanent MNA Committee be requested to make available to presbyteries. by May 1.
1991. information that will be helpful in recruitment, assessment. and training of church
planters. and for formulating policy and procedures for church planting.

m.

153

PCADIGEST
MISSION TO NORTH AMERICA
A letter has gone out to all presbytery MNA chainnen giving the requested data
including a brochure on the Assessment Center and a list of upcoming assessments. Both the
church planting manual entitled "Laying Finn Foundations" and the "Suggested Manual for
Presbytery MNA Committees, PCA" have been given to each presbytery. Additional copies are
available through the MNA office.
BUILDING CLUB
(See also FIVE IN FIVE; REVOLVING BUILDING FUND;

INVESTOR'S FUND FOR
BUILDING AND DEVELOPMENT; PART IV: BYLAWS, MANUALS AND GUIDELINES,
MNA, Policy Manual)
1974, p. 79, 2-104, IT, 12. That the General Assembly authorize the Committee on MUS to
establish a "Building Club" with the following purpose, membership, program and goal.
Purpose
To provide a means of helping the infant church begin to build the first unit of its
church building.
Membership
Those who will pledge $10.00 per appeal, to be used completely for a specific church
building program.
Program
a)
The assistance will be used only on MUS and Presbytery-approved programs.
b)
An appeal for help will be limited to a maximum of three a year, none to be less
than three months apart.
c)
The assistance will be used only for the actual construction program, and only
for the first building program of a church.
d)
Each member will receive detailed infonnation about each proposal, and will
receive progress report.
Goal
At least 5,000 members, 1974-75.
CANADA

National Church
1986, p. 115, 14-43, ill, 7. That the Assembly answer the overture from the Presbytery of
Eastern Canada (M J3GA, p. 132, III Recommendation 3) by pennitting the Canadians to take a
name, or names, acceptable to Canadians without attempting to disavow their international
relationships. The Assembly on its part will order its Committee on Mission to North America,
and encourage its other presbyteries and churches, to offer the Canadians all possible aid for the
development of a Canadian national church.
The recommendation was further amended by adding to Attachment G (Appendix J, p. 375),
"Western Expansion of PCA", a new 3.e:
"that the General Assembly order the Mission to North America Committee to give
greater effort in building PCA churches in Canada, and that the General Assembly
encourage its other presbyteries and churches to offer the Canadians all possible aid for
the development of PCA churches in Canada.";
See Appendix J, Attachment G, p. 375, for the full text.
CENTER FOR URBAN THEOLOGICAL STUDIES

1984, p. 151, 12-67, ill, 24. That the PCA accept the invitation of the Center for Urban
Theological Studies to become a member of the sponsoring association with representation
through MNA.

154

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
MISSION TO NORTH AMERICA
CHANNEL FUND

1973, p. 46, 1-66, 14. That the General Assembly approve a Channel Fund using this
Committee's treasurer to the end that member churches may channel gifts to approved
individuals and programs.
CHURCH GROWTH

(See also EVANGEUSTIC PROGRAM; MISSION CHURCHES)
1973, p. 24, 1-10. Resolution
Be it resolved that the First General Assembly of the Continuing Presbyterian Church:
1.
Urges all its member congregations to consider prayerfully its opportunities for forming
a new Continuing Church congregation in a neighboring vicinity, and to move toward
the establishing of such a new congregation by the next General Assembly.
2.
Requests the General Assembly'S Committee on the Mission to the United States to
provide strategy papers for the realization of such goals.
3.
Encourages Presbyteries to work with local congregations in making plans for the
establishing of new churches during the coming year.
1974, p. 79, 2-104, II, B, 8. That the General Assembly adopt as its policy that the
Committee on Mission to U.S. continue taking advantage of the many opportunities for the
establishment of new churches, with the constant thought in mind of firming up and
substantiating what already has been done in 1974 by the establishment of more Presbyteries;
and that these objectives be commended to the churches for prayer.
1976, p. 63, 4-53, III, 3, f. That the General Assembly encourage local congregations and
Presbyteries to continue to be active in the work of a new church planting.
1982, p. 85, 10-66, III, 12. That the first report of the plan for denominational development
requested by the Ninth General Assembly (report of the Committee of Commissioners, Item 5)
and prepared by the Committee on MUS (Attachment A) be approved, and that the Committee
on MUS be instructed to continue development of the plan with more reference to small town
church planting, and bring to the Assembly any changes from year to year that experience might
dictate.
1983, p. 121, 11-61, III, 3. That the Assembly commit itself to seek a 6% growth in
established churches and a 10% growth in newly organized churches in the next year. Our chief
goal is to increase the professions of faith and adult baptisms.
1984, p. 149,12-67, III.
1.
That churches of the PCA give a higher priority to evangelism and church development
in the neglected parts of the United States and Canada and among those from other
nations, in these beginning years of our denomination.
2.
That our churches continue to strive toward our goal of 6% growth, recognizing that in
older, static communities this may not be achievable, but in new and dynamic
communities, and in young churches, even 13% annual growth is often realized. (With
an average growth in churches of 6% and with expected new church additions our goal
of doubling the denomination between 1982 and 1992 will be achieved. Our growth in
1983 was 5.7%.
1985, p. 98, 13-44, III, 9. TIlat we affirm the following courteous code of behavior to
guide our church planting ministries in North America:
A.
We will be sensitive to the presence of existing churches and missions ministries of
other NAPARC churches and will take great care in receiving members of these
existing ministries.
B.
We will communicate with the equivalent or appropriate agency (denominational
missions committee or board, Presbytery missions or church extension committee, or
session) before initiating church planting activities in a neighborhood where NAPARC
churches or missions ministries exist.

155

PCADIGEST
MISSION TO NORTH AMERICA
C.
D.

We will provide information 00 at least an annual basis describing progress in our
ministries and future plans.
We will encourage our regional home missions leadership to develop good working
relationshi~.

(Gro\Ulds: The above is the "Golden Rule" Comity Agreement of NAPARC as slightly
amended.)
1985. p. 112. 13-49. III. 1. That the PCA emphasize and participate as far as possible in
the westward expansioo of the Church during the next five years.
1987. p. U5. 15-60. III.
10.
With God's sovereign, elective love in mind, that the General Assembly approve of
MNA's employment of bold strategies of evangelism and church growth in all facets of
American and Canadian life and culture; to expect and plan for a bountiful response,
and to anticipate that God may very well increase our number of churches to over 2,000
and our membership to over 400,000 by the year 2000 and to give full attention to the
need to promote growth in church depth and Christian nurture equally alongside growth
in numbers.
11.
That the General Assembly call on the Committee on Administration, Covenant
College, Covenant Seminary, Ridge Haven, Insurance, Annuities and Relief,
Foundation, Christian Education and Publications, The Investor's Fund and Mission to
the World to anticipate strong growth in the denomination (" ...that the Father may be
glorified in the Son") and begin to make faith plans now to be ready to meet the
challenge and opportunity this presents.
23.
That the General Assembly endorse the vision of 300 PCA churches starting daughter
congregations in 1990, and instruct the MNA permanent committee and staff to prepare
the materials and training for its implementation. It is understood that responsibilities
for the actual church planting will be under the session of the local church (the mother)
and coordinated by the presbytery.
1987. p. 165. 15-80. III. 6. That the General Assembly accept the explanation made by
NAPARC and adopt its "Golden Rule Comity Agreement."
a.
NAPARC defined "enlisting" as "actively recruiting" and felt that the paragraph
regarding communicating is sufficiently clear without further refinement or definition.
b.
The "Golden Rule Comity Agreement" as adopted by all the NAPARC churches but the
PCA reads as follows:
"That we affmn the following courteous code of behavior to guide our church planting
ministries in North America:
1)
We will be sensitive to the presence of existing churches and missions
ministries of other NAPARC churches, and will refrain from enlisting members
and take great care in receiving members of these existing ministries.
2)
We will communicate with the equivalent or appropriate agency
(denominatiooal missions conunittee or board, Presbytery missions or church
extension committee, or session) before initiating church planting activities in a
community where NAPARC churches or missions exist.
3)
We will provide infonnatioo on at least an annual basis describing progress in
our ministries and future plans.
4)
We will encourage our regional home missions leadership to develop good
working relationships. "
1989. p. 92. 17-56. III. 4. That the General Assembly reaffirm its commitment to a faithful
and aggressive expansion of the church throughout North America. with the involvement of
every believer, local church, and presbytery, using every possible biblical means, with an
expectation of great harvest by faith, because of the work of our Sovereign God.

156

ASSEMBLY ACflONS
MISSION TO NORTH AMERICA
1989, p. 152, 17-82, III, 10. That amendments to the BCD are unnecessary to enable
Session and Presbyteries to be guided by the NAPARC AGREEMENT. and that the Assembly
communicate the NAPARC AGREEMENT to Sessions and Presbyteries for their guidance.
1990, p. 129, 18-56, III.
4.
That the General Assembly reaffinn its commitment to a faithful and aggressive
expansion of the church throughout North America, with the involvement of every
believer. local church. and presbytery. using every possible biblical means. with an
expectation of great harvest by faith. because of the work of our sovereign God; that the
General Assembly commend to local churches and presbyteries the involvement of the
MNA committee and staff in their efforts to develop strategies for church planting.
5.
That the General Assembly call the Presbyterian Church in America to continue
concerted prayer for the work of MNA, for evangelistic outreach and for genuine
revival in our churches.
6.
That the General Assembly urge every congregation before God to consider specifically
if it should not be a part of starting another church.
Adopted

COLLEGE CAMPVS WORK
1976, p. 66,4-57, d. Overture 8
That the oversight of college campus work be committed to the Committees on Mission
to the United States of the Sessions. Presbyteries. and General Assembly.
(2)
That the Mission to the United States Committees of the Sessions. Presbyteries. and
General Assembly study and develop a philosophy and program of Presbyterian and
Refonned college campus ministry.
(3)
That such a study of the philosophy and program take into serious consideration the
already existing college campus ministries across our nation.
(4)
That the Committee on Mission to the United States of the General Assembly function
in this matter primarily as a coordinating and resource body.
(5)
That the Congregations and Presbyteries become actively involved in a ministry to the
college campuses in their geographical bounds.
(6)
That the Committee on Mission to the United States of the General Assembly be
responsible for the development of college campus ministries where there is no
Presbytery that can so function.
1977, p. 100,5-100, IV, 7.
a.
Avenues for establishing campus ministries:
1)
Plant churches in college communities with no vital Refonned witness. These
churches would look to unify and consolidate the gains of campus ministries.
2)
That the priority of the PCA in campus work be the establishment of distinctly
Refonned work on the campuses of key colleges and universities in each state
within our boundaries.
3)
If a member of a PCA church desires to serve on the staff of one of the
parachurch ministries. and his local session and presbytery approve him. the
MUS Committee could itinerate him/her to raise support. The staff worker
would be subject to joint control of both the MUS Committee and the
organization;
b.
That a practical manual of campus ministry be written. including (1) a Reformed
philosophy of campus ministry; (2) information for equipping and advising local
churches how to fonn profitable relationships with the campus; (3) any agreements and
arrangements between the MUS Committee and existing para-church campus
ministries. For the preparation of this manual. churches and presbyteries with
successful college ministries would be consulted;
c.
That a member of the MUS staff be appointed to carry out the stated purposes using the
approved avenues outlined above;
(1)

157

PCADIGEST
MISSION TO NORTH AMERICA

Grounds:
1)
That the MUS Committee may have the opportunity and encouragement to move
forward in the area of campus ministry.
2)
That congregations and presbyteries which desire to establish campus ministries may
have the resources of the MUS Committee available to them.
3)
That the Pennanent Committee has not (in the written report - Minutes of General
Assembly, p. 66,4-57, 302) reflected the instructions of the Fourth General Assembly
(page 66, 3-02) in the preparatioo of a Presbyterian and Refonned Philosophy and
Program of Campus Ministries urging PCA churches and Presbyteries to do the work of
campus ministry.
1978, p. 76, 6-51, III, 6. That the Sixth General Assembly grant the Pennanent MUS
Committee an extension of one year to carry out the desires of previous General Assemblies on
campus work, and that the MUS Committee appoint a Sub-Committee to prepare a practical
manual for Presbyterian and Refonned college campus ministries and that this Committee
include strong representation from among those actually involved in this specialized ministry.
1992, p. 77, 20-23. II. 10. Since from the time initial discussions are started it nonnally
takes two to four years before a campus minister begins his work on a campus, and since a
feasibility study is usually done in conjunction with the presbytery's MNA Committee, it is
recommended that the GA encourage presbytery MNA committees presently not involved in
campus ministry through the PCA's campus work (Refonned University Ministries) to contact
GA MNA's campus ministries department to work with them in determining the feasibility of
starting campus ministries in their areas.
Adopted
1993. p. 96, 21-41. 111,12. That the General Assembly approve the following:
That in order for the General Assembly to understand the full scope of PCA campus ministry,
the entire budget of the Campus Ministries Department of MNA and that of the affiliated
campus committees, be provided hereafter to the GA for its information as Reformed University
Ministries' budget and that the GA note with thanksgiving the entire 1994 Reformed University
Ministries' budget.
Rationale:
A.
Since its beginning, the GA MNA Campus Ministries Department has provided
support, resources, ministry-at-Iarge projects, events, activities, and oversight of
campus ministries as directed and funded by affiliated ministries. It has also assisted in
starting campus ministries in geographical areas desiring such ministries and has helped
them become affiliated with Refonned University Ministries/Mission to North America.
B.
The GA MNA budget, Campus Ministries Department, contained two elements:
1.
International Students Ministries
This line item reflects personnel costs, programming and associated expenses
for staff members. There are presently seven staff members on the field. The
budget allows for the addition of two staff people in 1994.
2.
Support Services and Area Assistance for affiliated campus ministries and their
staff and for ISCF missionaries. This includes financial support, training,
overall ministry projects, events and activities, and the necessary support staff,
office rent, and salaries. Funding comes from contributions from affiliated
ministries.
C.
Historically, the ministry budgets (personnel costs, program and associated expenses
for local Campus Ministries and their staff) have been approved by each affiliated
campus committee and its respective presbyteries. This is because all ministries and
staff operate Wider the supervision of an affiliated committee and its respective
presbyteries. This p-ocedure for budgeting is reflected in the affiliation agreements
between affiliated committees and GA MNA.

158

ASSEMBLY ACfIONS
MISSION TO NORTII AMERICA

D.
E.

The budget of Campus Ministries of MNA has never reflected the total budget
of the affiliated committees since those budgets are approved by presbyteries, not
General Assembly. Because these budgets are not reflected, a false impression is given
of support services and area assistance-related budget line items.
To reflect truly the total budget of campus ministries, both the ministries' costs and the
support costs need to be reflected in one form.
The campus ministries department has grown from providing services for ministries on
four campuses and seven staff members in 1984-1985 with receipts of $120,309 and
disbursements of $90,122, to ministries on 26 campuses and 51 staff members in 1992
with receipts of $1,341,714 and disbursements of $1,306,090. The financial records of
affiliated committees have been kept separately from GA MNA for these years with
yearly audits provided to respective affiliated committees.

COOPERATIVE AGREEMENTS

International Students. Ine.
1983. p. 123. 11-61. III. 7. That the cooperative agreement with International Students,
Inc., based also on the NAE doctrinal statement, be approved. Attachment B & C (p. 239)

Western Indian Ministries. Inc.
1981. p. 87. 9-35. III. 6. That the PCA continue to work with Western Indian Missionaries,
Inc. (Appendix F, p. 242) for one year and request that a doctrine statement and field policy be
submitted for approval at the Tenth General Assembly and that approval of a cooperative
agreement be held in abeyance until a review of the doctrine statement and field policy of the
Western Indian Ministries, Inc., can be completed at the Tenth General Assembly. (See 1981,
Appendix F, p. 242)
1983. p. 123.11-61. III. 6. That the cooperative agreement with Western Indian Ministries
which is now based on the NAE doctrinal statement be approved. Attachment A & C (p. 238)
Adopted with substitution of Attachment B-I0 for Attachment A-9
DISASTER REUEF AND EMERGENCY AID

(See also PART IV: BYLAWS, MANUALS AND GUIDELINES, Mission to North
America, Policies for Disaster Relief)
1980. p. 73. 8-29. 111.24. That the General Assembly assign responsibility for coordination
of all PCA disaster relief efforts
a.
within the 50 states of the USA to Mission to the United States, and
b.
outside the 50 states of the USA to Mission to the World
1982. p. 88. 10-66. III. 16. That the following proposal from the Committee on MUS to
establish a fund for North America disaster relief and other emergency aid be approved and that
the churches be encouraged to give to the fund any monies designated for diaconal relief
purposes in excess of local needs at the end of each year. To build up these funds churches
might be advised to receive a second offering for the poor at the regular communion services.
a.
Our nation is suffering a recession. Manufacturing plants have been closed and
unemployment is high. Some Christians suffer. The remedy now applied seeks to
remove the hand of national government in large measure so that less is taken from the
citizenry in taxes and less is distributed to the poor by agencies of the state. This
should serve to challenge the church of Jesus Christ. Will the church take care of the
suffering brethren as an example to the whole world of the way the people of God love
one another? Can we recapture the reality of Christian fellowship within the church,
and between churches, that so recommended the primitive church to the common
people: the churches of Jerusalem, Antioch, Philippi and Corinth?

159

PCADIGEST
MISSION TO NORTH AMERICA
The Committee on Mission to the United States was designated by the Ninth General
Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America as the agency of the church which
should act in national disasters for the relief of human suffering. The Committee
proposes that the mandate be enlarged to include the sufferings of saints, for whatever
cause, which are beyond the ability of the particular church to which the sufferer
belongs.
c.
The Committee makes the following proposals:
1)
Each particular church and mission of the PCA should look carefully to the
needs of its own members, assuring that there is no undue suffering because of
wants that can be alleviated by the compassion of Christian brethren on the
local level.
2)
Each particular church and mission having an excess of funds, particularly at
year's end, for "diaconal" purposes should share those funds with churches
having a lack by forwarding them to the Assembly's Committee on Mission to
the United States designated for the Disaster Relief and Diaconal Emergency
Fund.
3)
Each particular church and mission having needs within the membership which
cannot be met locally, should apply to the Disaster Relief and Diaconal
Emergency Fund for aid.
4)
Policies for the administration of the fund shall be determined by the
Committee on Mission to the United States.
d.
In support of this proposal we quote from Acts 11:27-30 (KJV): "And in these days
came prophets from Jerusalem unto Antioch. And there stood up one of them named
Agabus, and signified by the Spirit that there should be a great dearth throughout all the
world: which came to pass in the days of Claudius Caesar. Then the disciples, every
man according to his ability, determined to send relief unto the brethren which dwelt in
Judea: which also they did, and sent it to the elders by the hands of Barnabas and
Saul."
e.
We suggest the commentary of Matthew Henry in explanation of the above passage:
"When they were told of the famine at hand, they did not do as the Egyptians, hoard up
corn for themselves; but, as became Christians, laid by for charity to relieve others,
which is the best preparative for our own sufferings and want. .. The persons that were
recommended to them as objects of charity, were, the brethren that dwelt in Judea... The
care which every particular church ought to take of their own poor we were taught by
the early instance of that in the church at Jerusalem, where the ministration was so
constant that none lacked (Acts 4:34). But the communion of saints, in that instance, is
here extended farther, and provision is made by the church at Antioch for the relief of
the poor in Judea, whom they call their brethren... This early care was taken upon notice
of this famine coming, to send them a stock beforehand, lest if it should be deferred till
the famine came, it should be too late. Every man determined to send something, more
or less, according to his ability, what he could spare from the support of himseH and his
family, and according as God had prospered him. What may be said to be according to
our ability we must judge for ourselves, but must be careful that we judge righteous
judgement. "
1985, p. 113, 13-49, III, 12b. That the Thirteenth GA appoint a Disaster Services
Coordinator to plan and implement the PCA's formal disaster response, including advocacy,
home repair and financial assistance.
1985, p. 114, 13-49, III, 14. That the Assembly approve removing the collection and
distribution of gifts for Mercy Ministries, except for the cost of office support, from the annual
budget of MNA, allowing the receipting of gifts (good for tax purposes) and the distribution of
those gifts without budgetary restraints according to need as determined by a Subcommittee on
Disaster Response.
b.

160

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS

\•

MISSION TO NORTH AMERICA

,

1986, p. 115, 14-43, III, 3. That the Assembly note the employment of a Disaster Services
Coordinator, as ordered, and urge that presbyteries proceed to identify area coordinators and
train disaster response teams. That the Administrative policies of the "Disaster and Diaconal
Fund" (Appendix J, Attachment C, p. 367) be approved provisionally, for the use of MNA in
decision-making in the administration of this fund, until those policies are received and reported
on by the Study Committee on Diaconal and Mercy Ministry.
1987, p. 127,.15-60, III, 27. That the Administrative Policies of the Disaster and Diaconal
Fund (M14GA, Appendix J, Attachment C, p. 367), which were approved provisionally last
year, until the study committee could report back to this assembly, now be approved as the
guide for MNA in making policy decisions in the administration of this fund. (See Appendix K,
Attachment E, p. 361)
1987, p. 128,15·61,3. That the Assembly find the Administration Policies for the Disaster
and Diaconal Funds of the Committee on Mission to North America to be in accord with the
guidelines in the attached document (See Appendix K, Attachment E, p. 361).
DUTIES

(See also PART V: POSmON PAPERS, Mission and Purpose of the PCA, pp. 429-436)
1974, p. 73, 2·98.
1.
To nominate a Coordinator to each General Assembly and recommend his salary to the
Committee on Administration.
2.
To study the mission needs in the nation, and inform the Assembly of these needs.
3.
To promote mission work outside the boundaries of the Church until such work can be
integrated into the regular Presbytery, and to assist in the coordination of such work by
Presbyteries.
4.
To cooperate with Presbyteries in their mission work.
5.
To promote financial aid where needed and other mission support throughout the
denomination.
6.
To interpret the mission program to the denomination.
To maintain liaison with the Mission to the United States committees of all the
7.
judicatories.
8.
To organize provisional Presbyteries.
ETHNIC MINISTRIES

(See also CE&P, CROSS CULTURAL TRAINING)
1984, p. 150, 12·67, III, 11. That Overture B, carried over from the RPCES Synod of
1982, be answered by reference to the above report, section number VIT. Our churches and
people are encouraged to reach out to those ethnic minorities near them and include
missionaries among the ethnic minorities of North America in missionary conferences, faithpromise programs and/or in their missionary budgets. Where cross-cultural work is being done,
or is contemplated by churches or presbyteries, the services of our Coordinator of Ethnic
Ministries, TE Dwight Linton, should be considered.
1990, p. 129, 18·56, III, 9. That the General Assembly take note of the pressing need many
Ethnic churches have for worship facilities, and that the Assembly urge PCA congregations to
open their hearts and, where possible, their facilities to Reformed groups of other cultures.
EVANGEUSTIC PROGRAM
(See also CHURCH GROWTH; MISSION CHURCHES)

1982, p. 90, 10·66, III, 21. That the Committee on MUS be approved as the primary
agency of the General Assembly to provide help and service to our churches in the fields of
evangelism, revitalization and church growth, and that churches of the Assembly be encouraged
to seek these services from the Committee, after first seeking such help from their local church
and Presbytery MUS Committee.

,

\

161

PCADIGEST
MISSION TO NORTH AMERICA
1982, p. 93, 10-66, III, 28. That the Tenth General Assembly call upon the MUS
Committee to plan an evangelistic program in conjunction with the Eleventh General Assembly,
which will help instruct and motivate both teaching and ruling elders in the wodc of evangelism.
1987, p. 125, 15-60, III, 9. That the General Assembly praise God for His predetermining
love, effectual calling and irresistible grace for sinners and commit itself to the ingathering of
all those who are so loved of the Father as to be able to respond, using every Biblical strategy of
evangelism available.
FIVEINFJVE

(See also BUn.DING CLUB; REVOLVING BUILDING FUND; INVFSTOR'S FUND FOR
BUllDING AND DEVELOPMENT; PART IV: BYLAWS, MANUALS AND GUIDELINES,
MNA, Policy Manual)
1976, p. 83, 4-76, I, 9. That the following recommendation of the Permanent Committee on
Mission to the United States be referred to the Permanent Committee on Administration for
study and answer to the 1977 General Assembly.
That the General Assembly approve a five year five million dollar capital funds campaign for
Mission to the United States to be used primarily for the construction of new churches. This
recommendation is made in light of the fact that at the present time more than eighty (80) of our
Presbyterian Church in America congregations do not have their own "church building," and
that that number will increase each year as new congregations are begun throughout the United
States.
1977, p. 100,5-100,9. That the General Assembly approve a five year, five million dollar
capital funds campaign for Mission to the United States, to be used primarily for the purchase of
land and the construction of new churches. This recommendation is made in light of the fact
that a great number of our Presbyterian Church in America congregations do not have their own
land or "church building," and that number will increase each year as new congregations are
begun throughout the United States.
1978, p. 77, 6-51, 10. That the actual loans from the "Five in Five Campaign" are to be
handled through a loan committee consisting of one teaching elder and two ruling elders
appointed by the MUS Committee and empowered to effect decisions regarding the loans,
reporting these to the MUS Committee through the Coordinator.
1979, p. '91, 7-29, III, 21. That the General Assembly amend the policy guidelines
established by 'MUS Committee, Presbyterian Church in America, for loans to Presbyterian
Church in America congregations, Minutes of the Sixth General Assembly. p. 78. paragraph 5,
inserting the following sentence as an additional paragraph at the end of paragraph 5:
This obligation is not enforceable in a civil court, but is understood to be a moral obligation.
1980, p. 87,8-50, 111,17.
B.
That the General Assembly reaffirm the idea and the goal of the Five in Five program
(on the basis of one dollar per month per member-over-five-years-asking).
C.
That the General assembly encourage the churches who have not yet made their pledge
to this special Assembly-wide program to do so prayerfully and promptly in order to
facilitate the building of the church.
D.
That the MUS Committee appoint a group of professionally qualified men to give
advice as to how to complete the Five in Five Campaign promptly; and, to study and
recommend further alternate methods for making maximum use of funds, in view of the
eroding effects of inflation and the present economic situation.
E.
That the General Assembly make the following change in the Five in Five program, in
view of the skyrocketing inflation upoo the available funds:
A portion of the fund shall be administered as an endowment, with loans being
made for new church development from the interest received on these investment funds.

162

I

ASSEMBLY ACfIONS

\

MISSION TO NORTH AMERICA

I

The policy of Five in Five shall not allow for regular, undesignated gifts to be
placed in an endowment, but if donors designate their gifts to be placed in an
endowment. such designations shall be honored.
1981, p. 88,9-35, III, 21. That the Assembly reaffirm the idea and the goal of the Five-inFive Program on the basis of $1.00 each month. each member. over five years' asking. and that
it encourage the churches which have not yet made their pledge to this special order, to facilitate
the building of the church.
1982, p. 87, 10-66, III, 15b. That the Assembly take notice of the approaching end of the
fifth year and the continuation of the effort according to the recommendation of the Committee
amended below:
1)
The five years of the Five in Five Capital Fund approved by the Fifth General
Assembly will expire at the end of this year, 1982. A decision will therefore have to be
made by the Assembly to either discontinue fund raising efforts or continue the
program. possibly with some alterations.
2)
It is the opinion of the present Committee on Mission to North America. none of whom
were on the Committee when the program was inaugurated. that the Five in Five
program has been a great blessing to our infant church and should be continued
indefinitely. It is hardly to be imagined that a denomination as young as ours should so
soon be left without means to help the many new churches being established to obtain
buildings of their own in which to meet. The erosion of the present funds due to
inflation will continually minimize its usefulness until it disappears altogether.
Testimonials as to the program's past blessing will be given to the Assembly, but will
be distributed on the floor so as to not encumber the minutes.
3)
No new pledges to Five in Five have been made in the last two years. although many
new churches have been added to presbyteries of the Assembly. Many other churches
and presbyteries may be added during the course of this Assembly. Present pledges
amount to $2.052.310, although nine churches which have made pledges have paid
nothing on their pledges. As of November 30. 1981. $1.067.232 has been received by
the Five in Five Fund to the benefit of 38 churches which have received loans.
4)
With the Reformed Presbyterian Church. Evangelical Synod. we will receive on our
staff Mr. Richard Aeschliman. coming to us from National Presbyterian Missions. The
Committee on Mission to the United States has assigned Mr. Aeschliman the
responsibility for Five in Five. and he has accepted those responsibilities. We believe
that the program will once again receive competent leadership.
5)
It is the proposal of your Committee on Mission to the United States that the words
"Five Million in Five years" be dropped from our vocabulary. The name does not
appear in the original authorization from the Fifth General Assembly. Instead, the fund
will be known as a new church building fund
6)
In order to establish a permanent program in the place of Five in Five, the Committee
on Mission to the United States proposes the following changes in the program as it was
originally established:
a.
A loan may be made, not only to an organized church, but to a mission church,
properly chartered as a legal entity. when such a loan is enthusiastically
recommended by the presbytery of jurisdiction and when the presbytery, by
simple motion, agrees to take the responsibility for repayment of the loan
should the mission fail in its obligation.
b.
Ordinarily, no loan will be made to an organized church already possessing a
sanctuary when the loan is to be used for the expansion of existing facilities or
for the replacement of those facilities. The purpose of the fund will be to help
new churches obtain land and/or first buildings they could not obtain by other

,
1

!

I

means.

163

PCADIGEST
MISSION TO NORTH AMERICA
As approved by the Eighth General Assembly, a portion of the fund will be set
aside as an endowment, with loans being made for new church development
from the income received on these invested funds. Regular, undesignated gifts
will not be placed in the endowment, but only those gifts so designated by the
donor will be added to the endowment.
1984. p. 149. 12-67. III. 5. That the churches of the Assembly again be encouraged to
support the Five Million Fund with regular gifts and our people be encouraged to make loans to
the Revolving Building Fund, in order that our new congregations be helped to obtain church
buildings of their own.
1991. p. 87.19-35. III. 6.
Whereas, the importance of an adequate dedicated building to facilitate church growth cannot
be underestimated; and
Whereas, due to the increasing expense and complexity of building programs, there is growing
need for the demand upon the various denominational agencies involved in providing
building assistance (to wit the MNA Building Department and the Investor's Fund); and
Whereas, These two agencies, having separate existence but some shared staff, have grown to a
point that their structure is unwieldy and cumbersome; and
Whereas, the primary focus of MNA is church extension and the primary focus of the Investors
Fund is church building and financing;
Therefore, it is requested that the 19th General Assembly agree to the transferring of files and
other assets, and the Five Million Fund, to Investors Fund for Building and
Development for administration and development.

c.

FOUNDING OF MUS (NOW MNA)

1973. p. 45. 1-66. To the end that God be glorified the Committee on the Mission to the
United States makes the following recommendations to this historic General Assembly:
1.
That the General Assembly accept as of this date the gracious offer of the Presbyterian
Evangelistic Fellowship to give to the General Assembly and its Committee on Mission
to the United States all assets, records, correspondence, and equipment which the
Mission to the United States Committee under the direction of the Presbyterian
Evangelistic Fellowship has acquired.
2.
That the General Assembly express it sincere thanks to Almighty God for the service
which the Presbyterian Evangelistic Fellowship has rendered to him in the organizing of
this part of the body of Christ.
3.
That the General Assembly commend the Presbyterian Evangelistic Fellowship and its
evangelists to member churches of this denomination as effective instruments of God in
the work of evangelism and that members churches of this denomination be encouraged
to support and use these men of God in the work of evangelism.
4.
That the General Assembly express its thanks to the sovereign God for the financial and
prayer support which individuals and churches have given to the Mission to the United
States Committee since it inception and for the work which He has already permitted
this Committee to begin.
GIFTS

(See GENERAL ASSEMBLY)

Designated
(See PART IV: BYLAWS, MANUALS AND GUIDELINES, MNA, Policy Manual)
GOAlS OF 'mE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH IN AMERICA

(See PART V: POSmON PAPERS, Mission and Purpose of the PCA, p. 433)

164

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
MISSION TO NORTH AMERICA
INTERNATIONAL STUDENT MINISTJUFS

1986, p. 116, 14-43, III, 9. The Assembly is asked to recognize the development of
International Student Ministries and approve the policy found in Attachment F (Appendix J, p.
373) to cover missionaries with International Student Ministries and Ethnic Church
Development.
Grounds: This policy is modeled on tested MTW policies. The MNA Committee expressed its
intention to include Ethnic Church Development under these policies.
1986, p. 373, AppendixJ, Attachment F.
Policy For Missionaries Under
The Committee On Mission To North America Working With
International Student Ministries And Ethnic Church Development
1.
Background
In a rapidly changing world, North America--the United States and Canada-has grown to be a mission field (in the historic sense of the word) of gigantic
proportions. H the Presbyterian Church in America is to be a national church, reaching
all segments of the American population as well as guests who are temporarily within
our borders, the Committee on Mission to North America will need to address these
new challenges in a consistent and orderly way. Our policy should apply to all those
who are missionaries under MNA, for they should be administered with
evenhandedness. These policies should not be greatly divergent from those which
control the ministries of the Committee on Mission to the World for we are committees
of one assembly. The policies stated here have been discussed with the responsible
persons in Mission to the World and among the various departments of the Committee
on Mission to North America.
The present impetus to establish a set of policies is the growing concern and
commitment of the Presbyterian Church in America to ethnic ministries and to ministry
with international students.
The sheer weight of numbers has demanded
denominational action.
a.
For instance, consider the growth of student guests from abroad

Year

Numbero/Students

1954-1955
34,000
1966-1967
100,000
1977-1978
268,940
1980-1981
+300,000
1982-1983
336,990
500,000
1985-1986
Seventy colleges and universities in the United States have more than 1,000
international students with 18 of those colleges having more than 2,000.
Approximately one of every six international students in the United States is seeking a
master's degree, and one in twelve is working toward a doctorate. Lawson Lau has
written in The World at our Doorstep, a handbook for international student ministry
(IVP): "In the next 25 years these students could occupy one-half of the world's top
leadership positions in government, business and education. It is hard to imagine a
more strategic group to evangelize. "
Concern for international student ministries is already seen in the PCA in the
following ways:
(1)
Miss Jean Lappin is working with international students under the
Committee on Mission to North America in the Atlanta area, and her
reports to churches, particularly in Georgia, Alabama and South
Carolina, have stirred great interest.

\
\

165

PCADIGEST
MISSION TO NORTH AMERICA
(2)

2.

A ministry to international students was begun at Tenth Presbyterian
Church in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and this was enlarged by Mr.
Bruce McDowell. This has had considerable success and has become
an example of what a local church and a committed pastor can do.
(3)
Mr. Jim Gearing was approved by the Presbytery of North Georgia as a
missionary to international students in the Atlanta area, and has wished
to come under the aegis of the Assembly'S committee.
(4)
There has been great interest expressed by seminary students who
would direct their attention toward ministries with international
students if there were the proper denominational vehicle under which
they could work.
(5)
Some other PCA churches already have a regular outreach effort
toward international students and are wanting to increase their efforts
within a denomination-wide system.
b.
As an example of ethnic developments which call for PCA ministries and a
policy to govern them, consider the influx of Latin immigrants in southern
California. The 1980 census indicated four million of Latin origin in the area,
but conservative estimates of the total in 1986, (including Wldocumented)
suggest seven million. It is believed that there may be 1,200 Hispanic churches
averaging 100 members each, which means that only 1.7 percent of southern
California's Latin population is related to an evangelical church. The PCA
must minister in this American Latin community!
The following policies and procedures are to be established for those desiring to do
cross-cultural ministry with the help and supervision of the Committee on Mission to
North America, whether that ministry is with international students (a campus ministry)
or under the department of Ethnic Church Development.
a.
The missionary is to be a member of a congregation or presbytery of the
Presbyterian Church in America. If the applicant is a member of a church he or
she will need the recommendation of the appropriate session for the projected
ministry. (An ordained teaching elder may be recommended for missionary
service by the Presbytery MNA Committee and/or the MNA Committee of the
General Assembly.)
b.
Each candidate must go through an application and assessment process
established by the Committee on Mission to North America. When approved
by the Committee for missionary service it will also issue a "call" which, in the
case of the unordained will be sent to the church in which the candidate has
membership in order that the candidate may be commissioned. In the case of
the ordained the call will be sent through the MNA Committee of presbytery
for the approval of the call by the presbytery itself.
c.
The candidate will continue in candidate status Wltil presbyteries, churches and
individuals have promised sufficient support for the ministry projected at which
time the candidate will become a missionary.
d.
The financial support of a particular missionary will consist of:
(1)
Salary package to include base salary, housing, health insurance, death
and disability insurance and retirement annuity.
(2)
Program budget which will include training, itineration, support
services provided by the Committee on Mission to North America and
field-related program expenses.
e.
The amount of financial support for a particular missionary will be determined
by the Committee on Mission to North America and will be recommended by
way of a call given to presbytery or a letter of recommendation to the
missionary's home church.

166

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
MISSION TO NORTH AMERICA

I

f.

3.

The missionary candidate, while in candidate status, will nonnally be involved
full-time in building a support base for his/her future ministry; support building
will ordinarily be completed within 18 months. During this time the missionary
candidate can be involved also in training, language school (if applicable) and a
part-time ministry, if approved by MNA.
The missionary candidate will receive a portion of his/her monthly salary in
g.
addition to health insurance beginning when it is financially possible as
determined by the Committee on Mission to North America. The portion
of monthly salary received will be adjusted by MNA in consultation with the
missionary candidate as funds accumulate in his/her support account The goal
is to see that the full support of the missionary candidate is received and paid as
soon as possible and that all expenses for itineration are reimbursed as they are
incurred.
MNA will determine what the allowable deficit in a missionary's account will
h.
be, and this may be determined in part by the type of missionary work to be
perfonned and the department under which the missionary will
eventually work. A deficit, normally, should result only from expenses for
monthly health insurance premiums and for itineration-related expenses.
i.
The missionary candidate's itineration will be coordinated by the appropriate
MNA department.
j.
The missionary candidate's funds will be applied to an account under the
missionary's name and ministry (e.g., International Students--Bill Jones or
southern California Hispanic team--Joseph Smith). The goal is to build
support from churches and individuals for a ministry as well as for a
missionary .
k.
Whenever a missionary leaves a ministry to which he has been called, for
whatever reason, the support funds remaining in that missionary's account will
be placed in an account which will continue to support ministries of like kind.
The policies above will apply to all "missionary" ministries under the review and
control of the Committee on Mission to North America.

LAY MINISTRIES

(See also PART IV: BYLAWS, MANUALS AND GUIDELINES, MNA, Policy Manual)
1979, p. 89, 7-29, III, 7. That Attachment B (p. 203) the "Guidelines for Lay Ministries"
be approved as presented.
1979, p. 203, Appendix G, Attachment B.
Guidelines Governing The Relationship Of Mission To
The U. S. With All Unordained And Lay Workers
(As Requested By The 5th General Assembly)
A.
Definitions
1.
There shall be two categories of personnel;
a)
Unordained men preparing for the Gospel Ministry
b)
Lay workers with special skills and training necessary to the support of
our mission as defined by the General Assembly. (Page 44, Minutes of
the First General AssemblY)
2.
Those in the first category (l.a. above) are fulfilling a dual role in their
ministries with MUS.
a)
They are receiving training necessary to their future ministries.
They are supplementing and supporting the ministries of others.
b)
3.
Those lay men and women (l.b. above) may be doing anyone of the following:
a)
Providing a program support either to a ministry of MUS or to a
mission with which MUS has a cooperative agreement.

\

1

167

PCADIGEST
MISSION TO NORTH AMERICA
b)

4.
B.

C.

D.

E.
F.

G.

Serving as a lay missionary in an evangelistic or teaching capacity
where ordination is not necessary.
c)
Ministering in what might be called a Diaconal ministry.
In this context we will speak of "unordained" and "lay worker" as representing
the two categories (La. and b).

Support
1.
The support of the unordained will be looked upon as bare maintenance. Basic
living needs will be met. It is understood that the support of such personnel
must be a cooperative effort of MUS, the Presbytery and the local church. The
primary benefit to the unordained is the training and experience received.
2.
The support of the lay worker will not be materially different from that of the
organizing pastor, except that education and experience will be considered.
Supervision and Assessment
1.
The unordained will always be assigned under the supervision of an organizing
pastor, a minister of the PCA in the vicinity of his service, a presbytery
evangelist, a member of the MUS staff, or the Presbytery MUS Committee.
2.
The minister charged to supervise will also be asked to make assessments of the
unordained workers ministry and progress at regular intervals.
3.
The lay worker will be supervised and evaluated according to the procedures
already in force or those that will be later established to affect organizing
pastors and UPM missionaries.
Ministries for the Unordained
1.
The unordained may be theological students on summer vacation or students
who are participating in a clinical year. They may also be men who are in a
second year of post-M.Div. training under the more direct responsibility of
Assembly or Presbytery MUS Committee.
2.
They might be used in any of these ways:
a)
To survey an area, gathering data, developing interest and ministering
from house to house, in hope that a PCA church will be established.
b)
Participate in a team ministry with an evangelist, organizing pastor, a
UPM missionary, or other unordained men and lay workers.
c)
Serve as a short-term assistant to the pastor of an established church as
a part of the training process.
d)
Serve as a short-term assistant of an evangelist in a mission church.
e)
Work in some specialized ministry of benefit to the PCA. as in a
summer conference. youth ministry. rehabilitation center. etc.
Ministries for the lay worker are mentioned under A.3. above.
Cooperation
1.
The Committee on MUS will cooperate with those seminaries approved by the
Assembly in giving practical experience of benefit to the PCA as well as the
unordained.
2.
The Assembly's Committee will cooperate with presbyteries and local churches
in assigning the unordained so as to support their ministries.
Qualifications for Employment
1.
Only those unordained or lay workers that are members of a local PCA church
or mission will be eligible for employment under these guidelines.
2.
Before appointment to a ministry the unordained and lay worker must have a
positive recommendation from the session of the local church. In addition, the
unordained should have a letter of recommendation from the applicable
department of the seminary in which he is enrolled or from which he has been
graduated.

168

ASSEMBLY ACI10NS
MISSION TO NORTH AMERICA
MERCY MINISTRIES

(See DIACONAL MINISTRIES; PART V: POSmON PAPERS, Diaconal Ministries, pp.
159-181; Mercy Ministry, Biblical Guidelines, pp. 414-428)
MISSION CHURCHES
(See also CHURCH GROWTH; PART IV: BYLAWS, MANUALS AND GUIDELINES,

MNA, Policy Manual)
1974. p. 79. 2-104. II. 11. That the Church, which is authorized to call and appoint
Teaching Elders to labor as Pastors (JJCO 8-3), authorize the Committee on MUS to call
Teaching Elders to be organizing pastors in areas not within the jurisdiction of an existing PCA
Presbytery, provided the call is approved by the Teaching Elder's Presbytery. (JJCO 22-1)
1975. p. 66. 3-48. III. 6. That guidelines adopted by the MUS Committee on May 2-3,
1975, be approved by the General Assembly as follows:
"The standards for support of new work within the geographic bounds of existing
presbyteries from the Committee on Mission to the United States of the General Assembly."
1)
10 families with 75% attendance of 30 or 40 people.
2)
Giving should project that it will be self-supporting in 2 years.
3)
Half of pastor's salary is to be underwritten by the congregation from the outset.
4)
Pastor must pass examination by MUS Committee regarding the man's qualification for
starting a new work.
5)
A specific cut-off date of MUS funds scheduled.
1981. p. 87. 9-35. III. 9. Overture 19
Whereas, the Book of Church Order does not provide standards or guidelines for the instruction
and preparation of those groups seeking to be organized into Presbyterian Church in
America congregations, and those persons seeking to be ordained as officers in PeA
congregations:
Therefore, the Presbytery of the Western Carolinas overtures the Ninth General Assembly to
take steps to devise procedures for the instruction and preparation of groups seeking
organization as congregations in the PCA, and for men looking to be ordained as
officers within local congregations in the PeA.
That the penn anent MUS Committee proceed with establishing such Standards.
NAME CHANGE

1981. p. 88. 9-35. III. 14. That the name of this Committee be changed to the Committee
on Mission to North America, but that change be made in printed material of the Committee
only in nonnal course of reprinting.
1982. p. 93. 10-66. III. 26. That the Assembly now vote upon and finally approve name for
this Committee to the Committee on Mission to North America. These are to be used as general
guidelines for the committee to follow in assisting new work.
OFFERING

1983. p. 123. 11-61. III. 9. That congregations be encouraged to take a special offering
during the Thanksgiving season for the work of your Committee on Mission to North America.
1993. p. 91. 21-41. III. 4. That the General Assembly approve an offering for PeA Mercy
Ministry to be taken preferably during the Thanksgiving season.
Adopted

\

169

PCADIGEST
MISSION TO NORTH AMERICA
POUCY

1981, p. 225, Appendix F, 5.
GA MUS should provide standardized fonns on which presbytery MUS can be
periodically reported to GA MUS.
b.
Presbytery MUS Committee reports to presbytery should be shared with GA MUS.
c.
The GA MUS should videotape its organizing pastors' conferences and make the
videotapes available for use within the presbyteries.
d.
The following definition of a mission church should become s~dard: "A mission
exists when the goal of organizing a particular church is being pursued under the
oversight and support of either GA MUS, Presbytery MUS, a mother church or a
combination of the above. Where possible a church nearby should hold members on its
roll as associate members for the mission work until the day of the mission's
organization. In remote areas the presbytery is encouraged to place an evangelist on the
scene as organizing pastor for the purpose of receiving members. "
e.
The 20-minute slide presentation on the 5 in 5 Campaign should be shown in all the
churches of the presbyteries by Presbytery MUS Committees.
f.
The television spots already made available by the GA MUS to churches in two areas
should be made available in as many other areas as possible. (The Assembly MUS
Committee notes that it will not distribute a spot containing a picture of Christ.)
g.
GA MUS organizing pastors should be itinerated among the churches. The Chairmen
of Presbytery MUS Committees would be responsible for arranging this itineration.
h.
Each Presbytery MUS Committee should prepare a goals statements, have it approved
by the presbytery at its next meeting, and then send it to GA MUS for consolidation and
report to the General Assembly. (GA MUS would prepare a goals statement for areas
outside presbytery boundaries, and the consolidated report would constitute a master
plan for the church.)
a.

POUCY MANUAL

(See also PART IV: BYLAWS, MANUALS AND GUIDELINES)

1978, p. 76, 6-51, III, 4. That the MUS Committee be granted another year to prepare a
revised Mission to the US Policy Manual, and that a new MUS Policy Manual including a
training program for organizing pastors be presented to all presbytery MUS committee
chairmen for their suggestions before the final draft is prepared, and that the Permanent
,.
Committee present the Revised Policy Manual to the Seventh General Assembly.
Grounds: A real need felt by some of the organizing pastors for more training.
1981, p. 87, 9·35, III, 5. That the Policy Manual for the Committee on Mission to the
United States, and the Financial Policy and Procedures Manual be approved.
PRAYER

1974, p. 79, 2.104, II, B, 7. That the General Assembly approve a day of prayer for home
mission work.
[Note: Continued in succeeding years.]
1983, p. 123, 11·61, III, 8. That the Assembly encourage a season for prayer during the fall
months, perhaps one night each week for a month or one day each month for three months, to
pray earnestly for God's promotion of each Assembly and Presbytery cause and the evangelistic
outreach, spiritual vitality and stewardship of the local congregations; and that the three
program committees work together in developing the materials which will both prepare and
facilitate this ministry.

170

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
MISSION TO NORTH AMERICA

The concept of corporate prayer envisioned by this recommendation involves the
division of the congregation into prayer cells or units with a leader or coordinator over each.
(Many congregations are already so divided and those that are not are encouraged to maintain
such cells. once structured. for Bible study. evangelistic outreach. follow up. pastoral care. etc.)
Materials should be prepared to help the group know how to pray. specific needs for which to
pray (from General Assembly causes to the local church's outreach and stewardship) and how to
make the time most meaningful. The materials should include cards for MTW missionaries and
MNA church planters as well as- specific requests from CM. Administration. Covenant
College. Covenant Seminary and Ridge Haven. The goal of this season of prayer would be to
summon the whole church to the whole ministry of the Presbyterian Church in America.
PRE-ASSEMBLY

1985. p. 113. 13-49. III. 7. That the General Assembly approve the Pre-Assembly
Conference as an annual event. in cooperation with the other committees of the General
Assembly. administered by the MNA Committee.
PRESBYTERY MNA COMMIITEES

1979. p. 204. Appendix G. Attachment C.
Relationship Between Assembly
And Presbytery MUS Committees
That the General Assembly reaffirm that the relationship between the General
Assembly and Presbytery MUS Committees will reflect this agreement:
A.
Where funds are requested from the General Assembly MUS Committee. a strategy for
each Presbytery will be developed between the General Assembly and the Presbytery
MUS Committees in advance of making definite plans for definite works and men in
the Presbytery.
B.
Plans for each man and each work will be made in writing by both the General
Assembly and Presbytery Committees prior to taking any definite action.
C.
Only such specific places or works as have been planned in writing in advance as
mission areas by a Presbytery shall be discussed with a candidate. formally. as possible
places of service.
D.
The supervising party. the mechanics of administration and the goals for the work shall
be agreed upon by both General Assembly and Presbytery Committees in advance. The
work shall be evaluated according to a schedule and standards agreed upon by both
Committees.
E.
All works yet unorganized or individual churches outside the bounds of any Presbytery
will be supervised directly by the Assembly M-US Committee regardless of the
Presbytery membership of the evangelist or organizing pastor or the source of funding.
The above recommendations are presented in the spirit and with the desire of working
together in church planting in the most effective way possible. and with deep appreciation for
the work of the Committee.
QUEBEC MISSION FIELD

1983. p. 123. 11-61. III. 10. That the Assembly approve and give encouragement to our
entrance into the mission field of Quebec province. Canada. to work among the French
speaking people of Quebec only.
1983. p. 123. 11-61. III. 23. That Communication 6 be answered with the following
statement. That the French language work in the province of Quebec be removed from the
jurisdiction of the Presbytery of Eastern Canada and be designated a French language mission
field.

171

PCADIGEST
MISSION TO NORTII AMERICA
RADIO EVANGEUSTIC MINISTRY

1973, p. 46, 1-66,7, b. That the General Assembly approve an evangelistic radio ministry
to be directed by the General Assembly as it gives instruction to the Mission to the United
States Committee. (See Appendix for Supplemental Report of the Committee on Mission to the
United States, p. 162)
REVOLVING BUILDING FUND
(See also BUILDING CLUB; FlVE IN FlVE; INVESfOR'S FUND FOR Bun..DING AND

DEVELOPMENT; PART IV: BYLAWS, MANUALS AND GUIDELINES, MNA, Policy
Manual)
1983, p. 123, 11-61, III, 11. That the Assembly recognize the existence of the Revolving
Building Fund established by National Presbyterian Missions and accepted by your Committee
on Mission to North America in 1982 as a part of the Joining and Receiving agreement. This
fund will be operated by borrowing money from churches and individuals at a certain rate of
interest and then loaned to churches needing funds foe building purposes at a slightly higher
interest sufficient to cover expected administrative costs. We recommend that all Revolving
Building Fund contracts continue to be honored, and that this committee be encouraged to
continue and develop the RBDF as a further alternative for the financing of church buildings.
1985, p. 114, 13-49, III, 17b.
(1)
That the Committee on Mission to North America be authorized to establish and the
Board of Directors of the PCA be authorized to form and implement a separate RBF (Revolving
Building Fund) operating as a trust. Said trust shall receive monies and make loans for the
primary pu~ of church building construction.
Until further authorization by the General Assembly of the PCA the trust fund shall
solicit such monies only from members, member churches, presbyteries, agencies, or
committees of the PCA.
At the time of "joining and receiving" RPCES had in existence several 501 (C) (3)
corporation (tax-exempt corporations recognized by the IRS.) These corporations were
preserved and remain under the jurisdiction of the Committee on Administration.
(2)
That one of these corporations be considered as the vehicle foe this trust, if possible.
This trust shall be a civil legal entity separate from the existing PCA Corporation (a
civil Delaware Corp.).
This trust may pledge the assets of the trust fund but shall have no authority to pledge
oe encumber any of the assets of the PCA, it committees, or agencies.
(3)
This "trust fWld" shall be authorized to make loans to churches and/or presbyteries of
the PCA, for the construction oe remodeling of buildings and equipment or the purchase of land.
The trust fund shall be authorized to secure such loans by mortgages from the
borrowers.
This trust may pay interest on monies received and charge interest on loans made.
The initial trustees of this trust shall be appointed by the Board of Directors of the PCA
upon recommendation of the Committee on MNA. Thereafter, the trustees shall be elected by
the General Assembly of the PCA.
The trust shall report annually through the General Assembly's Committee on
Administration.
The trust shall make loans to only those borrowers who have prioe recommendation and
approval of the Committee on MNA of the General Assembly, and trustees of the fund.
This trust shall adopt no policy oe take any action which in any manner conflicts with
the right of the local congregation to own and control its own properties in accordance with
BC025.
(4)
The trust shall develop a policy manual which must be submitted for approval at the
14th GA.

172

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
MISSION TO NORTH AMERICA
1991, p. 118, 91-SS, III, 11. That the 19th General Assembly agree to the transfer of the
work of the MNA Building Department (including the Five Million Fund) to the Investor's Fund
for Building and Development for the PCA for administration and development
SISTER-CHURCH PROGRAM

1981, p. 88, 9-3S, III, 17. That the Assembly encourage the involvement of all our
churches in the Sister-Church Program established by the Committee on Mission to the United
States.
SUPPORT

Church Planters
1993, p. 91,21-41, III, S. That the General Assembly encourage congregations to consider
providing financial support in their benevolence budgets as they are able for specific church
Adopted
planters.
MNA Multicultural Missionaries
1993, p. 97, 21-41, 111,13. That the General Assembly encourage congregations to develop
within their churches advocates who can come to know the multicultural missionaries and their
need and who can speak to their churches on their behalf; and that congregations consider
Adopted
taking the financial support of an MNA multicultural missionary.
URBAN, POOR AND MINORITY MINISTRIFS

1978, p. 76, 6-S1, III, S•...That the Assembly's Mission to the United States Committee
shall appoint a Sub-Committee on urban, poor, and minority ministries and shall establish a
separate budget for these ministries and employ a director, responsibilities of this SubCommittee to include the following:
a.
To assist and supervise the urban, poor, and minority ministries in the PeA, in
cooperation with Presbytery MUS committees.
To acquaint the churches with these ministries, to promote them and to raise prayer
b.
support and funding for them.
To develop a comprehensive national strategy for planting churches and furthering the
c.
growth of God's kingdom among our urban, poor, and minority populations. In order to
accomplish this special task, the Sub-Committee shall have representation from the
Mission to the World and Christian Education committees and staff, and from those
actually involved in these ministries.
To encourage, assist, and train our churches in beginning outreach ministries to blacks,
d.
other minority groups, and the poor in and around their communities, in order to initiate
contact and confirm the PCA's interest in fulfilling the Great Commission in these
sectors of society.
e.
To study and report on all ways to implement a scholarship fund to assist minority
Christians to attend PeA related or approved higher institutions of learning in
preparation for the ministry or other fonns of Christian service.
To study and report on the feasibility of a Mini-Training centers program which would
f.
have as its purpose the equipping of minority Christians who have potential as leaders
(pastors, teachers, counselors) in English, Bible, Reformed Doctrine, Homiletics,
English Grammar, and other subjects.
To report its progress quarterly to the MUS Committee.
g.

173

PCADIGEST
MISSION TO NORTH AMERICA
WESrERN EXPANSION

1986, p. 116, 14-43, III, 10. The Assembly is asked to review the plan of MNA and the
three western presbyteries to accomplish the Assembly's wishes for emphasis on western
expansion and support the concept of a western office to facilitate this emphasis over a period
of five years. (Attachment G, Appendix J, p. 375 amended as follows)
3.a.4) insert "offer to" before "provide" and strike 3.e.
Grounds:
1.
on 3.a.4) This is to make clear that primary responsibility for church planting within
the bounds of presbyteries remains with the presbyteries.
Strike MNA's 3.e - this is covered by recommendation 7.
2.
1986, p. 375, Appendix J, Attachment G. For the Western Expansion of the Presbyterian
Church in America
1.
The 13th General Assembly approved and ordered a five-year special effort to expand
the PCA in our western states, west of Texas, Kansas, Nebraska and the Dakotas.
2.
The Committees of Mission to North America of the three PCA presbyteries in the
West called for a joint consultation to plan western development. A consultation of ten
men met, with GA MNA participation, in Walnut Creek, California on January 7-8,
1986.
3.
The Consultation consensus follows:
a.
That in ordering priorities the criteria suggested by MNA staff be accepted,
recognizing that our goal is to establish and/or strengthen presbyteries.
1)
Where a new region is being developed but is lacking a sufficient
number of churches to create a viable presbytery, new missions in the
region should have highest priority. (Le. San Francisco)
2)
Where a presbytery can be divided and the core area of the presbytery
would be unduly weakened, special efforts to start a few new churches
in the core area would have a high priority. (Le. Colorado and
Southwest)
3)
Where an area can be removed from a present presbytery to create a
more cohesive presbytery, able to take responsibility for a clearly
identifiable region, new mission churches in the area should be given
priority. (Le. San Diego)
4)
Where a presbytery has proven itself unable to reach into the territory
within its boundaries to begin churches in key population centers, the
MNA Committee of GA should provide help in initiating new church
planting projects. (Le. Northwest)
5)
Where there are large and influential cities in regions without PCA
presence, a pioneer effort should be made to plant a strong church in
each of these cities in faith that they will become radiating centers
around which presbyteries will grow. (Le. Salt Lake City)
b.
"It is the consensus of this gathering that the GA MNA Committee be
encouraged to proceed with the establishment of a western office, and that
serious consideration be given to the San Francisco Bay area, and that every
consideration be given to utilizing the gifts of Dr. J. Philip Clarlc when the
position is filled."
c.
The following locations should be considered as prime targets for new church
development in fiscal year 1987:
1)
Chandler or Scottsdale, Arizona
2)
Greater Phoenix
3)
Ventura, California
4)
Seattle, Washington
5)
San Francisco Bay area, California

174

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
MISSION TO THE WORLD
6)
7)
8)
9)
10)

4.

San Diego County, California
Portland-Willamette Valley. Oregon
Surrey/Delta, BC
Southwest Denver
Salt Lake City or some other major city in totally virgin territory (to the
PeA)
These are not in any order of priority except that 10 should be given lowest
priority unless a golden opportunity should present itself.
d.
It was suggested that the development of an Hispanic team in the territory of
Pacific Presbytery should be the responsibility of GA MNA and should not be
under presbytery control and supervision since an ethnic presbytery is a
possibility.
e.
The Canadian churches are asked to consider a target date for a new
Anglo/Canadian denomination, possibly in 2000. The PCA General Assembly
is asked for greater effort in building Canadian churches. Also, the idea of any
name change to satisfy the Canadians will be set aside with the announcement
of this goal.
The report of this consultation to the three presbyteries was well received. The MNA
Committee of the General Assembly received the report on March 6 and promised its
cooperatioo.

MISSION TO THE WORLD
CHRIST'S COLLEGE

1974, p. 68, 2-88, 4. That the General Assembly approve in principle the acceptance of
Christ's College in Taiwan, and to authorize the Pennanent Committee on Mission to the World
to actively support Christ's College while working toward completion of the transfer, ... and that
a report on the college and the proposed transfer to the National Presbyterian Church be heard at
this time. (See Appendix L for Agreement) (This authorizes the Committee to begin sending
missionaries to the college.)
1993, p. 88, 21-38, III, 26. That the FCCCA board become a decision-making board
relating to, and representing CMTW in regard to the oversight of Christ's College, working in
partnership with the Coordinator of MfW and the CMTW. Approved.
The General Assembly note that the Free China Christian College Association in
Taiwan continues to be a subsidiary corporation of the PCA.
Adopted
CHURCH PLANTING

1975 p. 115,3-93, III, A, 3. That the primary thrust of Mission to the World continue to be
the establishment and strengthening of Presbyterian and Reformed churches in other countries,
keeping a high proportion of church-pianting-oriented missions over service support missions,
with constant effort towards improving the current proportion; further, that the General
Assembly exhort Presbyteries and Sessions to make a concerted effort to actively recruit and to
extend calls to qualified and motivated ministers and young men preparing for the ministry for
the work of World Missions.
1976, p. 59, 4-41, III. 4. That the attention of the Fourth General Assembly be called to the
opportunities for church planting and evangelism in Brazil, Korea, Mexico, and Taiwan and the
need for more ordained men for each of these countries.
1976. p. 59. 4-41. III. 5. That the Committee on Mission to the World be requested to
develop a program during the coming year which shall encourage Presbyteries to take the
initiative in extending calls for missionary service to ordain ministers, who the Presbytery
would judge to be qualified for missionary service.

175

PCADIGEST
MISSION TO THE WORLD
1978, p. 67, 6-26, III, 6. That the Assembly urge the presbyteries to seek out from their
midst the evangelists and church planters, the men with the potential for cross-cultural
evangelism, and seek to call them for missionary service.
COMISSION

1993, p. 88, 21-38, III, 25. Instruct CMlW to find ways to have PCA missionaries serve
Adopted
with CoM iss ion without the binding of their consciences in using the "Jesus Film".
1993, p. 89, 21-39. Protest Regarding CoMission Cooperative Agreement
We, the undersigned, do hereby respectfully protest the action of the 21st General Assembly in
denying the MTW Committee of Commissioners Report Recommendation 3b to take exception
to the partnership agreement with CoMission on the grounds that it violates the PCA
Constitution (WLC QJA 109) by use of the Jesus Film. We believe the failure of the General
Assembly to uphold this exception is a serious departure from the plain teaching of the 2nd
Commandment (Exodus 20, Deuteronomy 5) as explained in the Westminster Standards. With
due respect to the brethren from the RPCES whose denomination officially permitted "pictures
of Jesus", it must be recognized that the PCA was founded as a strict subscription Church, and
that the General Assembly's failure to uphold the Law of God at this point is cause for grave
concern. May God provide a means for us to minister to the people of the former Soviet Union
without compromise of His Word in this way.
Note: See Personal Response to Protest, 21-61, p. 166.
COMMITI'EE OF COMMISSIONERS

(See also GENERAL ASSEMBLY, COMMITTEES OF COMMISSIONERS)
1991, p. 95, 91-46, III, 18. That the CMlW be instructed to provide its Committee of
Commissioners with all written documents to which reference is made in their minutes, which
shall include the reports of the Coordinator and all Directors.
COOPERATIVE AGREEMENTS

(See also PART II: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCO 14-1, 1982,

10-23)
(See the Report of the MTW Committee printed in the Minutes of the General Assembly
each year for the list of cooperative agreements for MTW and MTW/lmpact. The terms of each
agreement as it is made are included in the year the agreement is approved by the Assembly.)
1974, p. 68, 2-88, II, B, 2. That the General Assembly authorize the Committee on Mission
to the World to establish working relationships with other evangelical missionary agencies t1\ilt
welcome the services and teaching of missionaries holding the Reformed faith and polity, so as
to enable it to send candidates to them, as it may seem best for the greatest effectiveness in
proclaiming the Gospel, to work under their auspices while at the same time maintaining full
relationship to the NPC; also to receive and forward to the agencies concerned financial support
needed by them. Such missionaries shall be responsible to the Sessions or Presbyteries in
matters of doctrine and moral conduct, but at the same time subject to the rules of the agencies
under which they serve. Such missionaries shall be considered missionaries of the NPC, and as
such will send news and reports of their work to the CMW, their Presbyteries and supporting
churches and individuals in the NPC. Details as to itineration while on furlough, pensions and
other matters needing definition or adjustment would be worked out with the agencies
concerned, that careful evaluation be made at the 1975 General Assembly to be certain that our
missionary efforts under the program provide full and free presentation of the Gospel as
contained in and understood in the Reformed view.

176

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
MISSION TO THE WORLD
1975, p. 115, 3-93, III, 4. That the policy of relationships with other agencies that will
welcome the services and teaching of missionaries holding the Reformed faith and polity be
continued under the safeguards established by the 1974 General Assembly and as more fully
outlined and defined in Articles IT.C. 2 & 3 (p. 26-7) and Appendices A, B, & C (p 34ft) of the
proposed position paper entitled "A Plan for Mission to the World."
1975, p. 116,3-93. From "A Plan for Mission to the World of the Presbyterian Church in
America". (Articles IT.C. 2 & 3):
2.
Reformed Missions
There are many places where we can work in closest cooperation with other evangelical
Reformed missions. We can thereby avoid duplication and overlapping, give visible
demonstration of our unity and greatly further our major goal of planting and
strengthening Presbyterian Churches overseas. The cooperation in this model will be
the responsibility of the field committee of the Reformed mission.
Our relationship to each mission is defined in signed agreements. (See Appendix B for sample
copy, pp. 119-120)
3.
Interdenominational Missions
The above two models relate specifically to the planting and strengthening of
Presbyterian Churches overseas. The third relates to support and service ministries in
cooperation with evangelical missions and to a Reformed witness in deed and word
overseas. This model is 1) proper and scriptural because of the unity of the believing
church, 2) secondary to the task of planting and strengthening Presbyterian churches
overseas, and 3) limited by the definition of the General Assembly and by Mission to
the World's policy.
1975, p. 117,3-93. Agreements, which protect the interests of the General Assembly, are
signed by Mission to the World and the interdenominational mission. (See Appendix C for
sample copy, pp. 120-121) No missionary is sent to work with another missioo without this
signed agreement.
These additional guidelines and limitations are followed or suggested by Mission to the Wodd.
1)
Mission to the World ordinarily enters into discussioos with interdenominational
mission boards only at the request of a PCA church member, minister, session or
presbytery. The initiative for such a cooperative venture must come from a church
court or church member. Mission to the World does not recruit missionaries for
interdenominational missions. It responds to requests from its constituency - the
Presbyterian Church in America.
2)
Mission to the World does not participate in any way in its planning function in
cooperative effort with independent mission agencies.
3)
Only funds specifically so designated will be transmitted to independent mission
agencies for missionary support or project use.
4)
In keeping with our stated priority of planting and strengthening Presbyterian churches
overseas, it is expected that the larger portion of our missionary force will serve in that
category (the first two models).
5)
The missionary with an interdenominational mission must report to his sending body
and to Mission to the World at least once a year concerning the freedom he has to
minister and work in line with the General Assembly's instructions.
The coordination in this model will be the responsibility of the field committee
1976, p. 67, 4-59, 9. That an immediate area of cooperation with those churches in
ecclesiastical fellowship with us concerns our open policy with other evangelical mission
boards so that we would wherever possible give preference to such boards as are specifically
Presbyterian and Reformed in commitment.

177

PCADIGEST
MISSION TO THE WORLD
1978, p. 68, 6-26, III, 9. That the Assembly answer Overture 18 (6-11. A) from North

Georgia Presbytery and Overture 22 (6-11. A) from AsceMion Presbytery by requiring the
Pennanent Committee on Mission to the World to. submit to the 1979 General Assembly
clarifying language in these matters. and that the Mission to the World Committee be asked to
provide the Assembly a written rationale explaining why participating in these projects does not
violate the Manual.
1979, p. 132, 7-68, III, 12. That the following sentence be added to the end of the last
paragraph. p. 166. C. 3. Minutes 0/ the Fourth General Assembfy. "Each new cooperative
agreement will be presented annually to the Committee of Commissioners with the doctrinal
statements of each agency for review."
1982, p. 75, 10-48, III, 22. That it be noted. that as directed by the 1981 General Assembly
(Minutes. 9-50.
12; p. 107). additional correspondence was carried on with Overseas
Crusades Ministries. Inc.• which resulted in O.C. changing their doctrinal statement to that of
the National Association of Evangelicals.
1984, p. 345, Appendix K.
CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK FOR MISSION/CHURCH RELATIONS
The Presbyterian Church in America maintains ecclesiastical fellowship with
Presbyterian and Refonned church bodies in North America through NAPARC (North
American Presbyterian and Reformed Council). Through its Committee on Mission to the
World, the PCA relates to both these and other churches outside North America in its efforts to
carry out the task of world evangelism. This is done through specific written agreements.
These agreements are designed to enable both parties to be better stewards of God's resources.
The following statements fonn a framework for mission/church relations to guide the
PCA/MTW's relationship with churches outside its own country:
1.
The Presbyterian Church of America is part of Christ's church and as such possesses all
the promises and mandates given to the whole church. In obedience to the Scriptures
the PCA is committed to spread the gospel to the end that the church will grow both
qualitatively and quantitatively.
2.
Where Presbyterian/Refonned churches true to God's Word do not exist. PCA
recognizes its calling to plant new congregations and whenever possible pursues this
objective in cooperation with other Presbyterian/Reformed church bodies.
3.
MTW is the agency of the PCA appointed· by .the General Assembly to implement the
biblical injunction to preach the gospel beyond North America to the ends of the earth.
Both mission and church stand under the authority of Jesus Christ the head of the
church and His Word; therefore. the biblical principle of interdependence and
reciprocity is affirmed.
4.
We recognize that all cultures and peoples stand under the authority of Gods Word.
both as to fonn and substance of the chW"Ches' theology. We will therefore seek to
teach the whole counsel of God as we plant new churches. MTW strives to establish
presbyterian foon of government in the churches formed through its efforts. When
planting new churches and presbyteries. the cultural identity of the merging church
must be respected from its inception.
S.
MTW views its missionary calling as permanent but its missionary presence in any
given location transitional. giving way to local church leadership.
6.
When assisting in local church/presbytery programs. MTW views its role as supportive
rather than primary. the authority and responsibility resting with the church/presbytery
from the beginning.
7.
MTW recognizes that each church in its own context and depending on its age. level of
maturity. etc. may perceive agendas differing from those of MTW. MTW recognizes
the Validity of these differences as long as both church and mission are committed to
God's Word as fmal authority. These differing perceptions of priorities should not
inhibit fellowship.

m.

178

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
MISSION TO TIlE WORLD
Relationships between mission and church are sustained by a common theological
commitment rooted in obedience to the Scriptures as both seek to carry out the Great
Commission.
The vehicle for the expression of this relationship is a written agreement regarding a
9.
mutually agreed upon project. Such agreements are to be made at the operational level,
to cover responsibilities of both parties for specific action together, and are not to be
considered blanket endorsements.
Approved on September 9,1983 by the Committee on Mission to the World
Revised February 17, 1984 by Committee on Mission to the World
1986, p. 144, 14-62, III, 16. That Overture '18, p. 61 from Westminster Presbytery be
answered by approving the third plea - "3) that missionaries seconded to other agencies not be
sent to the field until such time as their cooperative agreements be approved by the General
Assembly." (The current list of cooperative agreements is found in the annual report of the
MTW, printed in the Appendix of the Minutes o/the General Auemb[y.)
1989, p. 122, 17-70, III, 22. That the Stated Clerk be instructed to list the names of
sensitive cooperative agreements in the Minutes, with the note that the agreement is held in the
Stated Clerk's office, to be made available to any bona fide member of the PCA.
8.

DUTIES OF mE MTW COMMl1TEE

1974, p. 73, 2-98.
1.

To nominate a coordinator to each General Assembly and recommend his salary to the
Committee on Administration.
2.
To advise the General Assembly of missionary needs abroad.
3.
To recommend ways of meeting these needs abroad.
4.
To assist Presbyteries and local churches to recruit missionaries.
To function as a sending agency for missionaries not otherwise accredited, and the
5.
support agency for missionaries not sustained.
6.
To promote the missionary spirit across the denomination.
7.
To interpret the missionary program to the denomination.
8.
To assist missionaries in their visas and recognition by foreign COWltries.
9.
To maintain liaison with the missionaries but not to function as administrator of the
local program of the individual missionary, and to work with them in developing their
work.
10.
To coordinate the work of Presbyteries in the endorsement of military and institutional
chaplains and to represent chaplains in relation to military and civil authorities.
To be a servant to the General Assembly. The General Assembly as servant to the
11.
churches shall establish and/or approve general guidelines and policies within which the
committee shall implement the denomination's efforts to fulfill the Great Commission.
The Committee shall have the responsibility for immediate supervision of the
Committee staff, which the General Assembly shall elect
(See also 1973, p. 38, 1-57)
The following additional comment on the relation of the Coordinator and staff was
made by the Committee in its report to the First General Assembly. The coordinator is the chief
executive officer of staff. He shall have the boundaries of his authority specifically drawn by
the committee and have access to a sub-committee empowered to give advice and counsel in
matters of urgent nature.
The staff shall have the responsibility under the coordinator to see that this specific
program of the General Assembly is given expression.
The staff shall consist of a coordinator and administrative secretary, a missionary
evangelist, a U'easUrer and other such personnel as needed.

179

PCADIGEST
MISSION TO THE WORLD
EXPENSES, ADMINISTRATIVE

1980. p. 69. 8-25. III. 13. That the General Assembly approve a policy by which the
Committee on Mission to the World may fund its administrative expenses by
a.
adding an administrative increment to the support requirements of each missionary, and
by transferring these funds from the missionaries' support accounts to the general fund
b.
as needed.
FOUNDING AND DEVELOPMENT

1973. p. 39. 1-57. 1. That the General Assembly accept the gracious offer of the
Presbyterian Evangelistic Fellowship that all of the financial assets of the Executive
Commission on Overseas Evangelism, the office equipment, records and correspondence,
mission projects, international contacts and records of prospective missionaries, and that we
express our gratitude to God and the leaders of the Presbyterian Evangelistic Fellowship for the
foresight that enables us to inherit such an extensive overseas program that has personnel in
three nations and projects in several more.
FREE CHINA CHRlmAN COLLEGE ~IATiON. INC.

1993. p. 88. 21-38. III. 26. That the FCCCA board become a decision-making board
relating to, and representing CMTW in regard to the oversight of Christ's College, working in
partnership with the Coordinator of MTW and the CMTW. Approved."
The General Assembly note that the Free China Christian College Association in
Adopted
Taiwan continues to be a subsidiary corporation of the PCA.
HANDBOOK

1977. p. 72.5-64. IV. 9. That the Assembly separate sections ill and N (Handbooks for
Candidates and Missionaries) from the policy sections of the Mission Manual so far as revision
procedure is concerned, the policy manual to be revised only by General Assembly procedures
while changes in the handbooks (which unavoidably need continual changes to meet changing
situations with regard to such things as insurance, annuity, travel, etc.) be reported annually to
the MTW Committee of Commissioners at the General Assembly for their approval.
LAY MI~ONARIES

1974. p. 68. 2-88. 8. That lay missionaries be allowed to participate in the 12% annuity

program. The Assembly referred this recommendation to the Trustees of the Insurance Fund.
1993. p. 86. 21-38. III. 12. That the seminaries and colleges involved in training PCA
candidates for ministries and PCA churches be urged to promote the need for both elders and
lay people to serve on Mission to the World church-planting teams.
MINUTES

1976. p. 59.4-41. III. B. 1. That a resume of the approved minutes of each MTW meeting
be mailed to each Presbytery MTW Committee Chainnan so that each Presbytery might be kept
abreast of current needs, concerns, and causes for praise.
MlW/IMPACI' [FORMERLY SERVANTS IN MISSIONS ABROAD (SIMA))

1980. p. 69.8-25.111. 11. That the General Assembly authorize the Committee on Mission
to the World to create a structure that will enable students and those who are non-career
missionaries to respond to God's call to short-tenn work worldwide.
1980. p. 69. 8-25. III. 12. That the Mission to the World Committee be authorized, for a
two-year period, to operate the Short-Term Project in exception to the Missions Manual in
Section 3.01.10 pertaining to PCA membership of Short-Termers*, and 2.02.1(4) and 2.02.2
pertaining to mis.sionaries raising their own support.**

180

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
MISSION TO THE WORLD

Quote from Missions Manual 3.01.10:
"Church Relationship. Prior to approval, candidates will be expected to be members of a
congregation or presbytery of the Presbyterian Church in America. "
*'This change would allow short-tenners, who are in full accord with the PCA standards, but are
not necessarily members of the PCA, to serve with Mission to the World.
2.02.1(4): "Support. It is clear that the sending churches in the book of Acts were involved in
the support--prayer and financial--of their missionaries. When a session or presbytery
encourages an individual to missioo service, it accepts the responsibility to back up that person
by prayer and giving."
2.02.2 Enabling Committee (paragraphs 6 and 8):
"It works with the missionary candidate and his church or presbytery in planning for further
training or experience where it is necessary. It assists churches and presbyteries in the matter of
support. It does not replace the sending bodies in this respoosibility but can and will assist
congregations and presbyteries, who desire assistance in the matter of support for their
missionaries, who do not have large support from their churches or presbyteries, to find
interested churches.
"It recommends salary and benefit levels, assists the missionary in itineration (in cooperation
with sessioo or presbytery) and helps him in the technical matters related to his going overseas. "
**For career missionaries this responsibility is that of Missioo to the Warld. This change
would give short-tenners the responsibility of raising their own support.
1981, p. 107,9-50, III, 13. That the General Assembly answer Item 8-80, ill, 19, p. 53 by
the Permanent Committee's minutes, June 5, 1981, p. 2, "Old Business" which says:
About 31% of the support has come from home churches. If you don't count home churches,
then only 5% of the SIMA support money has come from PCA churches other than home
churches.
1982, p. 74, 10-48, III, 16. That the General Assembly approve and establish as a
permanent program of Mission to the World, Servants in Missions Abroad (M8GA, 8-25, ill,
12, p. 69).
POUCY MANUAL

(See also PART IV: BYLAWS, MANUALS AND GUIDELINES)
1974, p. 68, 2-88, 9. That the Second General Assembly direct the Pennanent Committee
on Mission to the World to prepare a policy manual to be presented for approval and adoption at
the next General Assembly, and be authorized to hire an additional staff person, if necessary, to
implement this action, and that the Permanent Committee be reminded of our consistent
separation from the World Council and National Council of Churches.
1977, p. 72, 5-64, IV, 9. That the Assembly separate sections ill and IV (Handbooks for
Candidates and Missionaries) from the policy section of the Missioo Manual so far as revision
procedure is concem~, the policy manual to be revised only by General Assembly procedures
while changes in the handbooks (which unavoidably need continual changes to meet changing
situations with regard to such things as insurance, annuity, travel, etc.) be reported annually to
the MTW Committee of Commissioners at the General Assembly for their approval;
PRAYER

(See also DAYS OF PRAYER AND FASTING)
1978, p. 68, 6-26, III, 8. That the report of the Committee of Commissiooers on Mission to
the World be concluded with a time of prayer to God;
Praising Him for His blessings upon our growing commitment to world evangelization;
SeekiJ" (~ T-lis continued blessings upon our efforts to recruit cross-cultural church
planters;

181

PCADIGEST
MISSION TO THE WORLD·
Seeking the outpouring of His Spirit upon our churches, creating desire to fulfill our
responsibilities in meeting the needs of our missionaries in proclaiming Christ's Gospel around
the world;
Asking His protection and care over the staff of MTW and their families and His
blessing upoo their ministry to the missionaries, the candidates, and the churches at home;
And finally, submitting ourselves to Him for whatever changes in our plans or life-style
He wants to make to further the advancement of His Kingdom through world missions;
1979, p. 129,7-68, III, 2. That the General Assembly express its gratitude for each of our
missionaries and join in prayer for God's provision of every spiritual, emotional and physical
need in each of their lives.
PRIMARY THRUST

1977, p. 72, 5-64, IV,4. That the Assembly reaffinns the primary thrust of the Mission to
the World Committee to continue to be to establish Presbyterian and Reformed Churches in
other countries of the world.
PURPOSE

(See PART IV: BYLAWS, MANUALS AND GUIDELINES, Mission to the World, A
Picture of Purpose; PART V: POSmON PAPERS, Mission and Purpose of the PCA, pp. 435436)
RECR.U1TMENT

1976, p. 59,4-41, III, ~ 5. That the Committee on Mission to the World be requested to
develop a program during the coming year which shall encourage Presbyteries to take the
initiative in extending calls for missionary service to ordain ministers, who the Presbytery
would judge to be qualified for missionary service.
[Note: Reaffirmed in succeeding years.]
REFUGEES

1975, p. 62, 3-39. The General Assembly directed its Mission to the World Committee to
survey the neem of the South East Asians still quartered in military camps in this country, and
communicate its findings to the Churches, and summon all our congregations to prayer and
planning to determine how each church might best be used to effect the resettlement of these
people in our midst in the NAME of Christ, our Lord.
SUPPOR.T

Missionaries
1974, p. 68, 2-88, 5. That the General Assembly support the Committee on Mission to the
World as they seek to help the Presbyteries and Churches find reasonable, judicious, and
Biblical ways for raising support for approved missionary efforts by the Presbyterian Church in
America.
1979, p. 131,7-68,10. That in the future, when a particular missionary's account exceeds a
reasonable surplus (to be determined by the Committee on Mission to the World), funds
designated toward that missionary's support may be allocated to the work budget of that
particular missionary's field Notification of the Committee on Mission to the World intent to
implement this action is to be communicated to each future supporter of the missiooary with the
opportunity given for the supporter to redesignate his gifts.

Non-Reformed Agencies
(See PART IV: BYLAWS, MANUALS AND GUIDELINES, Mission to the World)

182

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
MISSION TO TIlE WORLD
TEN YEAR PROJECrION

(See PART IV: BYLAWS, MANUALS AND GUIDELINES, M~on to the World, A
Picture of Purpose; PART V: POsmON PAPERS, Mission and Purpose of the PCA, pp. 435436)
1984, p. 97, 12-29, III, 11. That the paper "MTW 1993--A Picture of Purpose" be
approved as the general direction in which Mission to the World should move during the next
ten years.
TENTMAKING PROGRAM

1986, p. 143, 14-62, III, 11.
That the Committee on Mission to the World endorse and seek approval from the
General Assembly in June 1986 to commission the development of a detailed plan that
would define factors relevant to the incorporation of a tentmaking program into MfW's
strategic plan.
b)
That said approval from the General Assembly would give necessary authority to the
Committee on Mission to the World to approve such an experimental plan and
administer it for a two-year period; and that such plan would include the possibility of
fonnation of a separate nonprofit corporation or foundation with ultimate control being
maintained by Mission to the World Such a corporation will place men and women
a)

from the PCA and other NAPARC churches who personally subscribe to the
Westminster Standards in acceptable service opportunities in countries otherwise
inaccessible.
c)

That the experimental program be brought to the 1989 General Assembly for final
approval.
1989, p. 122,17-70, 111,13. That the two-year experimental tentmaking program approved
by the Fourteenth General Assembly, June 1986, be extended for an additional three years and
that the experimental program be brought to the 1993 General Assembly for fmal approval.
VOLUNTEERS IN MISSION (VIM)

1982, p. 89, 10-66, III, 20. That the Committee on Mission to the United States, in
cooperation with the Committee on Mission to the World, use its offices to facilitate the use of
volunteer workers in mission endeavors in North America and in all the world.
VOLUNTEERS IN MISSION (VIM)
The Sub-Committee on Stewardship asked the Committees on Mission to the United States and
Mission to the World to prepare a plan for a pool of volunteer workers and a method of relating
them to short-tenn missionary opportunities at home and abroad. The staffs of the two mission
committees have prepared a proposal which is here presented to the Tenth General Assembly.
1.
Proposed that each committee prepare a list of opportunities for volunteer service, each
in its own sphere of responsibility but including other PCA organizations, missions with
which cooperative agreements are maintained and various compatible ministries. These
opportunities would be in the following job classifications, among others:
a.
Medical
b.
Construction
c.
Administrative
d.
Office and Secretarial
e.
Teaching (especially remedial reading and English as a second language)
f.
Maintenance work
g.
Agriculture
h.
Auto mechanic
Workers could be used in church building, mission maintenance or program
supplement

183

PCADIGEST
MISSION TO mE WORLD
2.

3.

Proposed that either a file or computer listing of vohmteers be maintained in each
mission office with such information as:
a.
Special skills and training
b.
Experience
c.
Health
d.
Financial independence
e.
Ability to travel
f.
Ability to meet own expenses
g.
Type and place of service desired
Those volunteering for service of from two weeks to three or more months might be
retirees, vacationers, those on sabbatical leave or with work furlough time, and YOtmg
people able to give all or part of a summer.
Any incidental expenses of promotion or maintenance of the VIM program will be
shared by MTW and MUS. The program will be promoted as a ministry of the PCA
and not as a ministry of either committee. The two committees will, however, accept
oversight in behalf of the Assembly.
Those volunteering for service of from two weeks to three or more months might be
retirees, vacationers, those on sabbatical leave or with work furlough time, and yotmg
people able to give all or part of a summer.

WOMEN MI~IONARIES

1975, p. 42, 3-11. Overture 11 ... [That the] General Assembly encourage the Mission to
the World Committee to be carefully Biblical in its use of women on the mission field,
particularly as regards evangelism, preaching, and church development; remembering Paul's
admonition to Timothy (1 Timothy 2:12): "But I do not allow a woman to teach or exercise
authority over a man, but to remain quiet." NASB
1975, p. 123, 3-93, III, C, 3. In response to Overture 11 of the Second General Assembly
concerning the use of women on the mission field, we recommend the overture to be answered
in the affirmative, with this additional explanation, since Scripture is to be interpreted by
Scripture, this is to be understood in the light of Acts 18:26.
WORLD REUEF COMMISSION

1975, p. 122, 3-93, III, A. 5. That we continue to use the World Relief Commission as an
avenue of help and hope in the disaster areas of the world.
[Note: Reaffirmed 4-41, III, A]
1981, p. 106, 9-50, III, 7. That the General Assembly urge the churches to set aside a
portioo of their budgets for the suffering peoples of the world, e.g., using the World Relief
Commission through MTW.
[Note: Reaffirmed in succeeding years.]
1993, p. 86, 21-38, III, 10. That the General Assembly urge the churches to set aside a
portioo of their giving for the suffering peoples of the world and that, to that end, it be
recommended that a special offering for World Relief be taken during the Easter season of

1994.

Adopted

ZIMBABWE REFORMED CHURCHES

1982, p. 74, 10-48, III, 14. That the matter of helping to rebuild the damaged Reformed
churches in Zimbabwe as referred to the Committee on Mission to the World by the Ninth
General Assembly (9GA, 9-50, III, 18, p. 109) be answered by the establishment of a special
fund in MTW to receive and properly transmit any such funds received from the PCA
constituency.

184

ASSEMBLY ACI10NS
MODERATORS (PRESBYTERy)
1981, p. 109,9-50, III, 18. That the request contained in Communication 9 be approved,
and given to the Permanent Committee on Mission to the World for implementation as soon as
possible.
Communication 9: From the Orthodox Presbyterian Church
Ninth General Assembly
Presbyterian Church in America

Dear Brethren:
During the past year the Refonned Church of Zimbabwe (fonnerly Rhodesia) informed
our church and other Reformed churches around the world of the devastation to many of their
churches and Christian schools during the war of attrition during the past several years, and they
asked if we would be willing to help in the overwhelming task of rebuilding. The Orthodox
Presbyterian Church is preparing to give assistance through our Committee on Diaconal
Ministries.
Our recent, 48th General Assembly, determined to inform you of this "serious need" so
that you might join in this effort. A letter from the Zimbabwe church describing this need is
being sent to you separately by our Diaconal Ministries Committee.
Part of the background of our desire for you to participate in this project with us is that
during the war the World Council of Churches, through its Program to Combat Racism,
contributed to supplying weapons to the terrorists of the political left. These weapons were
used indiscriminately and resulted in the death of many in the Reformed churches and the loss
of schools and church buildings. Another significant part of the background is that the Wodd
Council of Churches has, in the past, contributed to rehabilitation work while most of our
Reformed churches have stood on the sidelines with our hands in our pockets. Some churches
that have been thus aided/not aided have observed that the liberals are more helpful than their
own brothers in Christ of the Reformed churches.
Our General Assembly's hope is that your Assembly would commend this need to your
congregations, as a means of helping our brothers and sisters who have stood fast in and for the
faith during extremely trying times. If you do not yourselves have an agency through which
churches could channel their contributions our Assembly offers to handle them for you through
our Committee on Diaconal Ministries. Communications should be addressed to the Rev.
Lester R. Bachman, 806 Dorsea Road, Lancaster, PA, 17601.
This letter comes to you so soon before your Assembly convenes because our Assembly
met so recently. We hope that this will not be too late for consideration, and that a year's delay
in this important matter can be avoided.
May the Lord be with you in all of your deliberations.
Yours sincerely in Christ,
John P. Galbraith
Corresponding Clerk
48th General Assembly
The Orthodox Presbyterian Church

MODERATORS (PRESBYTERY)
(See PART II: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSITrUTION, BCO 10-3, 1984, 12-53,
#51; PART m: JUDICIAL CASES, #33)

185

PCADIGEST

MORALS. PUBLIC
1992. p. 120.20-51.25.
Whereas,
1.
Judea-Christian standards of morals and ethics are under vicious attack by secular
interests in the media, entertainment, and sundry anti-Christian organizations;
2.
Christian (biblical) family values are under attack by the same interests outlined in 1
above;
3.
Efforts by Christian groups to prevent abortion throughout the U.SA. and the world are
under organized attack supported by seemingly unlimited financing and political
organization;
4.
Such anti-Christian activity and the results therefrom are causing the disintegration of
American civilization, i.e. divorce, abortion, birth out of wedlock, drug abuse, alcohol
abuse, homosexuality and fornication, political, governmental, and civil corruption at
all levels, racist attitudes and activities, deficit spending both governmental and private,
child abuse and devastating crime including rape, murder, rioting, looting, and pillage;
Now Therefore, be it resolved that the 20th General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in
America boldly, publicly, and unequivocally supports all Biblical values involving
marriage, family values, sexual conduct and practices, social conduct and the sanctity of
life both parental and post-natal.
NAME OF THE DENOMINAnON
1973. p. 26. 1-16. Recommended Names for the Church
The Moderator reported that the Executive Committee recommended for the consideration of
the Assembly the following three names:
The Presbyterian Church in America
The Presbyterian Church of America
The National Presbyterian Church
The actual selection of the name for the Church was set for the Wednesday afternoon session.
1973. p. 31. 1-29. The General Assembly selected the name "National Presbyterian
Church" to be the name of the Church.
1974. p. 21. 2-10. The retiring Moderator gave a brief report of the progress of the National
Presbyterian Church since its First General Assembly. He presented the problem which has
arisen during that time regarding the name "National Presbyterian Church."
1974. p. 21.2-11. The following resolution was adopted by the Assembly
Whereas, the First General Assembly of the National Presbyterian Church did in good faith
adopt the name "National Presbyterian Church," and
Whereas, since the First General Assembly, it has come to the attention of the Board of
Directors of the National Presbyterian Church that there is a congregation of the United
Presbyterian Church in the United States of America in the nation's capital called by the
name "National Presbyterian Church," which congregation derives a portion of its
support from across the nation and claims a nationwide ministry, and thus fears that our
use of the same name will cause confusion in their support base, and
Whereas, representatives of the Washington congregation feel so strongly about this matter that
they indicate they would resort to the civil courts, if necessary, to settle this issue, and
Whereas, our Lord teaches that "If any man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let
him have thy cloak also. And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him
twain. Give to him that asketh thee, and from him that would borrow of thee tum not
away" (Mt. 5:40-42),

186

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
NAME OF THE DENOMINATION
Therefore. be it Resolved, by the Second General Assembly of the National Presbyterian
Church that it change the name of the Church. in obedience to her Lord. and in love for
our brethren in Christ of the National Presbyterian Church and Center of Washington.

D.C.
1974, p. 22, 2-17. Proposed Names for the Denomination
The following names were proposed for consideration:
1.
National Reformed Church of America
2.
The Presbyterian Church of America
3.
International Presbyterian Church
4.
Vanguard Presbyterian Church
5.
Presbyterian Church in America
6.
Presbyterian National Church
7.
Historic Presbyterian Church
8.
Evangelical Presbyterian Church
9.
International Reformed Presbyterian Church
10.
Presbyterian Church of the Covenant
11.
Nationwide Presbyterian Church
12.
Continuing Presbyterian Church
13.
National Continuing Presbyterian Church
14.
American Presbyterian Church
15.
Christian Presbyterian Church
16.
Presbyterian Church of Jesus Christ
17.
Refonned Presbyterian Church in the United States
1974, p. 43, 2-25. The top three names chosen were:
National Reformed Presbyterian Church
International Presbyterian Church
American Presbyterian Church
The Assembly selected National Reformed Presbyterian Church as the new name of the Church.
(See 2-34. 2-45 - 2-49)
1974, p. 44, 2-34. The Rev. Kennedy Smartt made the following motion: As one who voted
with the majority. I move that the Assembly reconsider the matter of the name of the
denomination.
The matter was docketed as the rust order of business at the afternoon session. with the
instructions that all committees be present.
1974, p. 48, 2-46. Names Placed in Nomination
The following names were placed in nomination for consideration:
Presbyterian Church in America
The Presbyterian Church
Intemllfional Presbyterian Church
Grace P!\sbyterian Church
Mission Presbyterian Church
National Reformed Presbyterian Church
American Presbyterian Church
Presbyterian Church of the Americas
1974, p. 48, 2.:.47. It was determined that no name should be adopted without a two thirds
majority vote of the General Assembly.
1974, p. 48, 2-48. It was moved to deal with all of the names including some form of the
word "America" separately. so that only one name appear on the final list. The name
"Presbyterian Church in America" was chosen.

187

PCADIGEST
NAME OF TIlE DENOMINAnON
1974, p. 48, 2-49. On the vote on the remaining slate the name "Presbyterian Church in
America" was chosen. The following is the tabulation of the votes:
Presbyterian Church in America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 302
The Presbyterian Church . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
International Presbyterian Church . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
Grace Presbyterian Church . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Mission Presbyterian Church . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 6
National Reformed Presbyterian Church . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
On a revote a total of 401 voted for Presbyterian Church in America.
1974, p. 70, 2·93. Resolved, that the Certificate of Incorporation of National Presbyterian
Church (A Corporation) be amended so as to change the name of the corporation from National
Presbyterian Church (A Corporation) to Presbyterian Church in America.
The Board of Directors or officers of this Corporation are hereby authorized and
directed to take such actions as may be necessary or proper to change the name of this
corporation to "Presbyterian Church in America. "
The above resolution was presented by Ruling Elder Robert Cannada, Chairman of the
Judicial Business Committee. It was adopted by the Assembly.

NAPARC
(See INTERCHURCH RELAnONS)
AGREEMENT ON TRANSFER OF MEMBERS

(See PART V: POsmON PAPERS, NAPARC's Agreement on Transfer of Members, pp.
437-438)
COMITY AGREEMENT (GOLDEN RULE)

(See INTERCHURCH RELAnONS, COMITY AGREEMENT)
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF EVANGELICALS
(See INTERCHURCH RELAnONS)

NATIONAL COUNCIL OF CHURCHES
(See INTERCHURCH RELAnONS)

NEWS OFFICE
1984, p. 106, 12·36, III, 18. That because the PCA continues to grow nationally and
internationally and because it is important to keep our mission before the world; that the
General Assembly allow the CFJP Committee and the Stated Cerle of the General Assembly to
develop a plan to establish a denominational news office and that a report of the progress be
made to the 13th General Assembly.
OFflCER

1986, p. 146, 14-67, III, 6. That the General Assembly appoint the editor of the Messenger
as the News Officer of the Presbyterian Church in America and allocate appropriate funds for
his activities, as partial fulfillment of the Business Carried Over, p. 65.
[Clerk's Note: No action was taken on the funding.]

188

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS

NOMINATING COMMIITEE
BIOGRAPIDCAL FORMS

1976. p. 86. 4-81. 5. The committee unanimously recommended that in the future
Presbyteries be provided with a standardized form for submitting infonnation to be used by the
nominating committee. This fonn would include infonnation such as: Presbytery, Committee,
Teaching Elder, Ruling Elder, Experience, Qualifications, Biographical data, etc. It was the
opinion of the committee that the use of such a fonn would greatly facilitate the work of future
nominating committees by providing standard infonnation from all Presbyteries and also assist
the Presbyteries in compiling and submitting this infonnation.
1982. p. 80. 10-61. III. 1. That the General Assembly adopt a policy that all Biographical
Forms be typewritten; that the Biographical Forms indicate the necessity; and that the Stated
Clerk be instructed not to circulate handwritten Biographical Forms.
1989. p. 132. 17-81.11.
5.
That the 17th GA instruct the pennanent committees and boards of agencies of the
Assembly to provide for the presbyteries job descriptions and lists of qualifications
appropriate to the committee or agency, and that the Assembly encourage the
presbyteries to nominate only those persons who meet these criteria.
6.
That the 17th GA instruct its Nominating Committee to meet face to face rather than to
conduct its business by mail and that the expenses be paid by the Administrative
Committee.
1993. p. 133.21-56. III. 13. That Overture 19 [to limit floor nominations] be answered in
the negative, and keep the system we are using now. However we would strongly urge that the
report of the nominating committee which is distributed at the General Assembly include the
biographical sketches from the Commissioners' Handbook as well as those of the men who are
nominated from the floor, so that commissioners, when voting, will have all the biographical
material in one place and be able to see it at a glance., and that Overture 19 be amended by
striking the first "Whereas" clause; and. . .
Adopted
Grounds: At the time of the nominating committee's report it is difficult to keep up with two
slates of nominees: ooe in the commissioner's bulky notebook and the other a few
sheets of paper in hand. This would eliminate that difficulty.
COMMI1TEE MEMBERS

1979. p. 105. 7-41. III. 24. That Overture 20 (p. 35) concerning increasing the term of
office for the General Assembly Nominating Committee members to two years be answered in
the affirmative.
COVENANT COlLEGE

1986. p. 136. 14-56. III. 6. That the 14th GA request the Board of Trustees of Covenant
College in its communications with Presbyteries, and the GA Nominating Committee, in regard
to prospective nominees for membership on the Board of Trustees, to include all of the
responsibilities of members of the Board of Trustees, listed in the Bylaws of the corporation and
not be restricted to the items mentioned in the Board of Trustees minutes dated October 24-25,
1985 Page 4, 85-27A.
COVENANT THEOWGICAL SEMINARY

1984. p. 156. 12-77. III. 16. That copies of the "Trustees Job Description" be sent to the
Presbytery Stated Clerks by the Stated Clerk of the General Assembly to be forwarded to the
chairmen of each nominating committee to guide the committee in nominating seminary
trustees.

189

PCADIGEST
NOM[NATINGCOMMmnLE
F1JNDING

1990, p. 113, 18-40, III, 42.
Whereas, the Nominating Committee serves the entire General Assembly by providing a slate
of nominees for all the committees and agencies of the PeA and
Whereas, the Administrative Committee is currently respmsible for paying all the expenses
incurred by the Nominating Committee;
Therefore, be it resolved that the Administrative Committee is instructed henceforth to divide
the expenses incurred by the Nominating Committee equally among the pennanent
committees and agencies of the General Assembly effective next Fiscal Year; and
That these committees and agencies are instructed to make allowance in their budgets for
anticipated Nominating Committee expenses effective the next Fiscal Year.
INSURANCE, ANNUITIES AND REUEF

1976, p. 87, 4-83, II, C, 4. Motion was tmanimously adopted that the Nominating
Committee be infonned that the board of Trustees does not admit the appointment of alternates.
1983, p. 158, 11-87, III, 6. That the General Assembly remind its Nominating Committee
that deacons may be elected to the Board and that Assembly rules do not require a specific
balance of Ruling Elders and Teaching Elders, that "geographical balance" is not required, and
that the primary consideration for election to the Board of Trustees of the Insurance, Annuities,
and Relief Funds should be qualification by background, training and experience for the
responsibilities assigned to the Board.
[Note: Reaffinned in succeeding years.}
STANDING RULFS

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

8.

9.

1.
2.

1977, p. 64, 5-35.
No person shall serve on the Nominating Committee two consecutive tenns.
Every member of the Nominating Committee should make a reasonable effort to attend
the next General Assembly.
The Nominating Committee should be reminded of paragraph 15-1 (9) of the Book of
Church Order regarding proportionate representation wherever possible.
No Presbytery shall ordinarily be represented by more than one person nominated for
any given Committee. This includes alternates.
A biographical form must accompany each name submitted to the Nominating
Committee (See Appendix M).
Presbyteries should send names of nominees on fonns to the Stated aerk's office no
later than six months prior to the General Assembly. The Stated Clerk will then make
the forms available to the Convener of the Nominating Committee.
A list of members, by Presbytery currently serving on Pennanent Committees, should
be furnished to the Convener of the Nominating Committee by the Stated Clerk. The
Directory of current Assembly Committees should indicate the Presbytery of each
Committee member.
All nominees should be contacted by their Presbyteries to ascertain their availability
and willingness to serve prior to submission of names to General Assembly's
Nominating Committee.
None of the Standing Rules should be interpreted as to restrict nominations from the
floor.
1987, p. 147, IS-6S.
That the Assembly authorize the Stated Clerk to mail out ballots by simple first class
mail and not certified, which is far more costly and time consuming.
That the Assembly ratify the election by the Committee of the Chainnan and Secretary
for next year, and authorize this as the standard procedure hereafter.

190

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
NUCLEAR WARFARE
1988, p. 185, 16-80, 4. That the General Assembly Stated Cleric specify a dated deadline
for the return of ballots and that the ballots must be post marked by that date to be counted.
1990, p. 115, 18-44, III.
1.
That biographical data for all alternates desiring to cootinue to serve be included in the
List of Nominations sent to the Nominating Cormnittee members (Rainbow Book).
2.
That the Cleric of the GA notify the stated clerks of the presbyteries of those presently
serving on Boards and Committees who are eligible to be reelected, so that they may be
renominated by their presbyteries.
3.
That section I.e. of the Nominating Committee RAO be changed from "Presbyteries
should send names of nominees on forms to the Stated Cerlc's office no later than six
months prior to General Assembly." to "Presbyteries must send names of nominees on
forms to the Stated Cerlc's office no later than four months prior to General Assembly."
(See New RAO 7-4)
That the Stated Cleric remind the Presidents and Boards of Covenant College and
4.
Covenant Theological Seminary that while the By-Laws allows (Article IV, Section 2
H 2,3) the boards to make recommendations, it does not make provisions for the
president of the institutions. or any other officers, to make recommendations. In the
future, recommendations concerning nominees will not be received by the Nominating
Committee unless it is clear that these are recommendations from the board and not the
president.
5.
That the Nominating Committee recommend to the GA Administrative Committee that
they develop and implement policies and procedures intended to facilitate the
establishing and sustaining of two members of the Board of Trustees of Covenant
College from other NAPARC Denominations and that this implementation be done in
time for the consideration of persons for the 1991 slate of nominees.
VACANCIES

1975, p. 61, 3-34. If there is one vacancy in the class, the nominee receiving the highest
number of votes will be elected, if he receives a majority of the votes cast. If no one receives a
majority, a run off will be held between the two receiving the largest number of votes on the
first ballot.
If there is more than one vacancy in the class, the two nominees receiving the highest
number of votes will be elected, if each receives a majority of the votes. If either does not
receive a majority of the votes, there shall be a run off between each nominee and the man
receiving the third highest number of votes.

NUCLEAR WARFARE
(See also PART V: POSmON PAPERS, Nuclear Age, pp. 439-454)
1984, p. 105, 12-36, III, 9. That, in answer to overture 23 to the 1983 General Assembly.
this Assembly direct Christian Education and Publications to establish a study cormnittee to
provide a report on the subject of pastoral guidance regarding nuclear armament and nuclear
deterrence. and that the Committee be asked to present to the Thirteenth General Assembly any
Christian viewpoints consistent with reformed theology.
1987, p. 101, 15-33. That the Fifteenth General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in
America, meeting in Grand Rapids. Michigan. adopt the report entitled "Christian
Responsibility in the Nuclear Age" as a reliable summary of biblical principles for pastoral
guidance regarding nuclear annament and nuclear deterrence. and direct the Committee on
Christian Education to make copies available to our constituency and other interested parties.

191

PCADIGEST

OFFICERS
DEPOSITION

Ordination Status
(See PART ll: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCD 30-5, 1982, 10-12,

C)

Restoration
(See PART ll: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCD 30-5, 1982, 10-12,

C)
DIVORCED

(See also PART m: JUDICIAL CASES, #51; PART V: POSmON PAPERS,
Qualifications for Officers of a Divorced Person, pp. 292-293)
1979, p. 106,7-42. The task given the Ad Interim Theological Committee on Divorce was
two-fold:
1)
To review and re-study Part II of the Constitutional Documents Committee Report
entitled "Interpretation of 1 Timothy 3:2, "the husband of one wife", and report to the
Sixth General Assembly;
2)
To consider and make recommendation concerning overture 12 from North Georgia
Presbytery to the Fifth General Assembly;
Whereas, God's Word enjoins His people to recognize the legitimacy of divorce on the grounds
of adultery, or desertion by an unbelieving partner only;
Whereas, our civil authorities have taken it upon themselves to recognize other than Scriptural
grounds for divorce;
Therefore, be it resolved that the General Assembly appoint a committee to further investigate
the practice of divorce and remarriage both within and without the PCA, to the end that
specific conditions of divorce be incorporated in the Book of Church Order, as may be
most conformable to the Word of God.
After a thorough discussion of the subject under consideration, the Committee adopted the
following statement and recommendations for presentation to the Sixth General Assembly:
I.
The interpretation of Paul's qualification for church officers, "the husband of one wife,"
1 Timothy 3:2, 12; Titus 1:6.
Paul's qualification that an elder or deacon must be "the husband of one wife"
has been interpreted mainly in four ways.
1.
Some have held that any twice-married man is thereby disqualified for church
office, and some devout scholars have translated Paul's words to read, "married
only once." Nowhere in the Bible, however, is the remarriage of a widow or
widower as such treated as a reflection upon that person's moral character.
Consequently, this interpretation does not seem valid.
2.
A second interpretation is that an elder must not be a polygamist or that he must
not have more than one living wife or more than one woman living who has
been his wife. Although scholars have differed in their judgment of the extent
to which polygamy posed a problem for the church in Paul's day, the
interpretation of Paul's words as excluding a polygamist from church office
appears to be a valid one.
3.
Some interpret Paul's qualification as directed against the divorce evil, which
seems to have been rather common, and have understood Paul's words as
disqualifying for church office a man who had divorced and remarried, or at
least a man who had divorced on other than Scriptural grounds and remarried.

192

ASSEMBLY AcrIONS
OFFlCERS
Still another interpretation is that a man called to office in the church must be a
man of unquestiooed moral integrity, a man who is free from any taint of sexual
promiscuity or laxity, and who is strictly faithful to his one wife.
Each of the latter three of these views has certain merit as an interpretation of
Paul's words, "the husband of one wife," both in the light of the immediate context
(with its emphasis on the officer's being above reproach and his managing his own
family well) and in the larger context of the whole Scripture. Paul's concern seems to
involve this much at the very least, that the man chosen to be a church officer (whether
elder or deacon) must be a man whose marital and family relationships are above
reproach, and whose personal example gives no encouragement to lax morality.
Recommendations:
1.
That the General Assembly reaffirm its commitment to the Biblical position as
summarized in the Westminster Confession of Faith, Chapter XXIV, regarding
the integrity of marriage according to the Divine ideal as being for life.
2.
That the General Assembly affirm that the integrity of marriage is founded
upon God's Word, which declares that marriage is God's institution and should
be God-centered, not man-centered Both husband and wife are the Lord's
servants and submit one to the other in terms of the Lord's purposes. They are,
together, the Lord's creatures, called to serve Him, with one, the husband,
exercising loving headship in that calling.
3.
That the General Assembly declare that the Biblical idea for church office is
exemplary conduct to the highest degree possible with regard to all of the
qualifications set forth by the Apostle Paul in 1 Timothy and Titus 1.
4.
That the General Assembly affirm that the Bible teaches that divorce is
permissible in the case of sexual immorality (Deuteronomy 24: 1-4; Matthew
19:9) or willful desertion of a believer by an unbeliever (1 Corinthians 7:15).
The innocent party is therefore free to remarry, since he is no longer "under
bondage" once properly divorced. (See Westminster Confession of Faith,
XXIV -5) Any man who is divorced in accord with Biblical principles, whether
remaining single or having remarried, may serve as a church officer.
5.
That the General Assembly urge church courts to exercise special care in the
cases of divorced/remarried persons who are considered for ordination, that
where there has been divorce and remarriage on other than Scriptural grounds,
guilt must be acknowledged and repentance for sin expressed.
6.
That the General Assembly remind the Church that in order to be considered
for church office the parties concerned in such cases must have been
rehabilitated sufficiently in the confidence and respect of other Christians as to
be able to fulfill in an exemplary way the requirements of church office with
regard to marital and family relationships. The General Assembly reminds the
Church and its courts that even when such care is exercised as is urged in this
and the foregoing recommendation, there may be circumstances in which it
would be inadvisable, even though technically permissible, for
divorce/remarried persons to serve as church officers.
7.
That the General assembly exhort sessions and presbyteries to follow Scriptural
guidelines carefully in dealing with present or prospective church officers who
have been divorced.
8.
That the General Assembly answer Overture 12 from the Presbytery of North
Georgia to the Fifth General Assembly, with regard to divorce and remarriage,
by reference to the Westminster Confession of Faith, Chapter XXIV.
4.

II.

193

PCADIGEST
omCERS
ELECI'lON OF

(See also PART IT: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCD 24-1, 1986,
14-52,17; 1988, 16-77,26)
1979, p. 101, 7-41, III 4. That answer 2 concerning the constitutionality of announcing in
the church bulletin prior to election day the names of those who have been examined and
approved by the Session for office, be amended as follows; and then answered in the
affinnative:
The Committee answered that although the procedure in question is not specifically
prohibited by BCD 25-1, it also is not provided for in that section.
Therefore, the Session is given latitude in interpreting the procedure outlined in the
Book 0/ Church Order 25-1 regarding announcement of officer nominees prior to the day of
election.
The Session is to examine all those nominated and report to the congregation those
eligible for election at the time of the congregational meeting. This is to say the Session is
providing the slate for elections.
Grounds: 1) Book o/Church Order 25-1 does not state that an announcement is not to be made
prior to the election of officers; only that one is to be made on the day of the election.
1979, p. 101, 7-41, III 5. That answer 3 regarding nominees to church office and the
proper procedure regarding these nominees be approved. The Committee answered that the
Session does not have the authority to delete names of nominees prior to their examination.
1980, p. 119,8·88, III, 20.... [That] the General Assembly declarers] that the local sessions
are to determine whether names submitted to it of prospective church officers are indeed "active
male members who meet the qualifications of the Woed." And that local sessions should
consistently apply their interpretation of what it means to be "active" from year to year or so
infonn the congregations of any changes. Furthermore that men should not be nominated with
the hopes that the high offices of Elder or Deacon will make them more faithful or interested in
the Church but because they have shown \Ulfailing interest in the worship and work by their past
diligence. "
EMERITUS

(See also PART II: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCD 24-9,1985,
13-45,50; 1~87, 15-83,10)
1984, p. 8.1, 12·10.
Whereas,
of our elders and deacons emeritus have become emeritus officers prior to the
Assembly'S motion, and
Whereas, the rules these men understood when they became emeritus officers have now
changed to disallow their voting privileges,
Therefore, be it resolved that this ruling not be retroactive, but only apply to those becoming
elders or deacons emeritus after this Assembly's conclusion.

many

NUMBER OF OF'FlCFS

(See PART V: POSmON PAPERS, Number of Offices, pp. 455-497)
ORDINATION VOWS

Exceptions
(See PART II: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCD 21-5,1984,12-53,
69, 2(A); 1984, 12-73; 1984, 12-83)
QUAUFICATIONS (REGARDING DIVORCE)
(See DIVORCED; PART ill: JUDICIAL CASES, #51; PART V: POSmON PAPERS,

Qualifications for Officers of a Divorced Person, pp. 292-293)

194

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
PCA OFFICE BUILDING
REMOVAL OF

(See PART IT: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION. BCO 24-6. 1986. 14-52.
16; 1986. 14-52.44)
ROTATION OF

(See PART II: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION. BCO 3-1. 1986. 14-52.
16.2; BCO 24-1. 1986. 14-52. 17; PART m: JUDICIAL CASES. #8)
ORDINATION
(See MINISTER. PREPARATION FOR MINISTRY)

PAEDOCOMMUNION
(See COMMUNION; PART V: POSmON PAPERS. Paedocommunion. pp. 498-515)

PALMER HOME FOR CHILDREN
1974, p. 80, 2-104, II, B, 13. The Committee recommends that the General Assembly
receive as information the following communication from the MUS Committee:
"MUS brings to the attention of the PCA the availability of the Palmer Home. Columbus.
Mississippi. for the care of orphans and dependents from broken homes. "
PARENTS' EDUCATIONAL RESPONSIBILITY
(See PART V: POSmON PAPERS. Church/State. IV. pp. 128-139)
PASTORS
(See MINISTER)

PCA OFFICE BUILDING
FINANCIAL RFSPONSIBIUTY FOR

1988, p. 114. 16-14. Therefore. be it so resolved that this 16th General Assembly of the
PCA request all her churches to sense their obligations and to fully participate with this Fund
Raising Committee in their directed responsibility by the 15th PCA General Assembly to retire
the purchased office building debt. Be it further resolved. that a copy of this resolution be
corrum.uUcated to each PCA church.
LOCATION OF

1973. p. 56, 1-75. The action on location of Committee offices. item 13 tmder 1-72. was
reconsidered. and amended to read: That the four Committees of the General Assembly with
their offices and staff be authorized to operate from separate locations during the first five years.
1976. p. 83.4-79, J, 5. That the Assembly authorize the Committee on Administration to
conduct an in-depth study on consolidation of Church Committee locations and make
recommendations to the 1977 General Assembly in reference to this. The report to include the
economic consideration of the consolidation. the location. and time of consolidation. That any
previous instruction of the General Assembly relating to a time limit that requires the
consolidation of the Assembly Committee Offices be removed.

195

PCADIGEST
PCA OFFICE BUILDING
1977, p. 79, 5-79, III, 3. The Assembly postponed for an additional five years (understood
to be added to the original five year period, which ends in December 1978) the decision on
whether or not to consolidate the four offices of the General Assembly.
1981, p. 156, 9-80, III, 14. That the General Assembly authorize its Committees to
consider a single geographical location, the Committee on Administration having the
responsibility to coordinate the search and to make recommendations to the Tenth General
Assembly.
1982, p. 69, 10-33,5. That the Assembly approve relocating the Business Administrator's
office to the same city as the Computer Center, and thus the same city as many of the
Committees of the General Assembly.
1982, p. 69, 10-33, 15. That the General Assembly approve locating the offices of the
Assembly's Committees in one geographical location.
Rationale: The Assembly has the right to detennine whether or not there will be a centralized
location, and likewise to make the selection of the location (if desired).
1982, p. 69, 10-33, 16. That the permanent location be recommitted to COA for further
study. Rationale: prerogative of the Assembly to make the detennination.
1982, p. 76, 10-48, III, 26. That the General Assembly authorize the Permanent
Committees to enter into real estate property leases not to exceed terms of three years, pending
decision as to permanent location.
1983, p. 80, 11-30, 11. That the greater Atlanta area be named the permanent location of
the offices of the PCA that are in the greater Atlanta area and urge serious consideration of
commoo office space for all committees and agencies, and that the Committee on
Administration be authorized to purchase or lease common office space, if agreeable to the four
permanent committees and agencies located in the greater Atlanta area, with report of studies
completed or action taken to the Twelfth General Assembly.
1984, p. 184, 12-90, III, 13. That the Committee 00 Administration be empowered to act
on behalf of the PCA to lease common office space as soon as possible taking into
consideration present lease arrangements and foreseeable space requirements for the Permanent
Committees and the office of the Stated Cleric, consistent with sound economic policy. The
motion is explained by:
A.
That no present leases of the General Assembly committees and agencies in the Atlanta
area be extended beyond the present expiration dates without the concurrence of the
Chairman of the permanent Committee on Administration.
B.
That on or before January, 1986, the committees and agencies in the Atlanta area hold
leases in a common office location.
C.
That the cost of shared space, not exceed current cumulative costs of the Permanent
Committees and office of the Stated Cleric with allowance for anticipated growth or
expansion as reflected in the approved General Assembly budgets.
D.
That the general maintenance and oversight of the facilities will be under COA.
E.
Following the move of the committees' and agencies' offices to a common location, a
series of studies by COA be undertaken to gather information in areas of: cost analysis
of consolidation; financial feasibility study regarding purchase or construction of a
facility; development of a plan for financing. This is to be reported to the 15th General
Assembly.
F.
By 1988 the COA will present to General Assembly a plan for its approval regarding
the purchase or construction of a facility to house the denominational offices.
G.
It is understood that application of this recommendation to the Trustees of Insurance,
Annuities and Relief Funds shall be subject to the documents governing operations of
the Trustees previously approved by the General Assembly.

196

ASSEMBLY ACI10NS
PeA OFFlCE BUILDING
1986, p. 171, 14-74, III, 16. That the recommendation of the COA "that the denomination
purchase building or land and build to suit the needs of the PCA" be deferred to the 15th
General Assembly and further that requirements of the 12th General Assembly, M12GA. p. 164,
12-90, ill 13 relating to a series of studies to justify such proposed action be completed and
presented to the 15th General Assembly as instructed by the General Assembly.
1987, p. 191, 15-92, III, 35. That the 15th General Assembly approve the purchase of 1852
Century Place, Atlanta. Georgia or a similar building to house General Assembly offices along
with the following:
i.
That ownership of the proposed building be in the name of the Presbyterian Church in
America (A Corporation)
ii.
That COA be authorized to appoint real estate agent Ronald O'Keefe, COA Coordinator
Earl Witmer. IAR Director James Hughes, RE Charles Lowry (COA member), TE
William Fox (COA Chairman) and the COA Advisory Committee consisting of Allen
Dubie, William Gordy, Robert Uken, Allen Morris, Robert Morrison, Louis Philhower,
and Loyd Strickland to negotiate all aspects of the purchase of the facility on behalf of
thePCA.
1987, p. 192, 15-92, III, 36. That the General Assembly adopt the memorandum "To:
Coordinators" (June 9. 1987) regarding procedural matters relating to office consolidation and
the purchase of the proposed building.
Revised Copy as of June 9, 1987
TO: Coordinators
FROM: Charles Dunahoo
RE: Procedural Matters
Please read the following and see if I have represented our conclusions properly.
I.
Procedures for things relating to office consolidation.
A.
There will be two levels of decision making regarding the consolidation of
space, service and functioos.
1.
Level One: A unanimous decision by all coordinators and agency
"heads" located in the Decatur offices. If these decisions impact the
Conference Center, College and Seminary, those agency "heads" will
also be involved in the process.
2.
Level Two: Partial consolidation of space, services and function will
be handled in the following manner: In any area in which the group
considers consolidating space, services or functions, any member has
the right not to participate in such consolidation. A decision not to
participate would constitute grounds for non-participation, but would
not prohibit others who desire to coosolidate in any given area from
doing so.
These procedures will be reviewed and evaluated at the January 1988
Coordinator's Meeting.
3.
A space planner will be used initially for a feasibility study and to
make recommendations for the above. Decisions will be made with
those recommendations either at level One or Level Two.
4.
Any CEO can bring before the entire group thoughts, suggestions
and/or recommendations regarding space, services or functions. Levels
One and/or Two will be used in each case.
II.
Goal.
A.
For the PeA to own the building and be managed by COA.
B.
If A. is not possible immediately then IAR is asked to own the building for 12
months up to five years and lease it to the PCA.

197

PCADIGEST
PCA OFFICE BUILDING
III.

Immediate Situation
It was agreed upon at the June 8, 1987 meeting of the coordinators that the following
contingencies must be met before proceeding with the purchase of a building.
A.
That the cost of rent governed by each committee's and agency's 1987-88
budget is not to exceed $12 per square foot.
B.
That a safety net be established. This is an adequate reserve (at least $100,000)
held by COA as a contingency fund to cover the needed operational and debt
retirement cash flow.
Examples:
(1)
$100,000 available through MTW already approved
(2)
Balloon loan, with payment of interest only
(3)
Accounts receivable approval from IAR--allowing partial debtretirement payments
C.
That a down payment and moving cost fund of $1.2 million on $2.3 million
purchase must be donated. Any purchase price increase over $2.3 million
increases the needed donations.
D.
That of the necessary down payment there must be at least one-half in cash up
front and commitments for the remainder within three (3) years.
1990, p. 92, 18-32, III, 19. MTW Gift to the Administrative Committee for the Building
On motion the Assembly voted to approve of and concur with the gift to the Administrative
Committee and that the tef'lm be printed in our minutes. The Agreement is herewith included
(see Appendix L, Attachment 12 for background):
AGREEMENT
This Agreement is entered into between the Committee on Mission to the World of the
Presbyterian Church in America (hereinafter "MTW") and the Administrative Committee of the
Presbyterian Church in America (hereinafter "AC") on the 15th Day of March, 1990.
Whereas, MTW wishes to make a conditional gift of $750,000 to be applied toward the
indebtedness of the PCA Office Building, located at 1852 Century Place, Atlanta,
Georgia; and
Whereas, AC desires to accept the gift and to affirm its willingness to abide by the conditions of
the gift:
Now, therefore, in consideration of the mutual promises set forth in this Agreement,
IT IS AGREED:
Term of Agreement. This Agreement shall be in effect until the sale of the present PCA
1.
Office Building.
2.
Application of Gift. MTW shall pay AC the sum of $750,000 to be applied in its
entirety to the current indebtedness 00 the PCA Office Building.
3.
Conditions of Gift& AC agrees to accept the gift, subject to the following conditions:
a.
The gift by MTW and the conditions of this Agreement are to be kept
confidential and are not be published by AC.
At the end of 1992, the remaining indebtedness on the PCA Office Building
b.
shall be refinanced for a term of ten (10) years more or less by AC.
c.
During that period covered by the refinancing of the indebtedness, AC shall
charge rents for occupants which are reasonably competitive with the rents for
comparable facilities in the area.
d.
A reserve fund shall be created by AC to be used exclusively for the necessary
repairs, replacement, improvements, depreciation, and expansion of the
building for future PCA needs.

198

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
PCA OFFICE BUILDING
e.

All funds received by AC from churches, foundations or individuals for the
Building Fund which are not needed for the periodic mortgage payments,
operational expenses of the building or the reserve fund shall be placed in a
separate interest-bearing account. Such funds shall not be used to prepay the
mortgage unless they are sufficient to prepay the indebtedness in full. In the
event of prepayment of the mortgage in full, the rents charged by AC shall
continue at a rate sufficient to accumulate a surplus which shall be deposited in
this fund over a reasonable length of time, not to exceed the refinancing term,
which is sufficient to repay to MTW the $750,000 or any remaining balance
thereof. If at any time during the term of said refinancing there are not
sufficient funds in the Building Account to meet the periodic mortgage
payments, the operating expenses of the building, or the reserve fund, funds in
this surplus account may be withdrawn to meet this need.
f.
Upon the completion of the refinancing period, all funds remaining in the
account established under the terms of e. above shall be returned by AC to
MTW. Such repayment shall not exceed the sum of $750,000. In the event of
prepayment of the mortgage in full, and upon the accumulation of $750,000 in
the account established under the terms of e. above, AC shall pay MTW
$750,000 at such time.
g.
If the present PCA Office Building is sold and the proceeds of the sale are not
invested in another PCA Office Building, AC shall pay to MTW a sum equal to
twenty percent (20%) of the net proceeds of the sale less any sum paid to MTW
under the terms of e. above.
4.
Termination. This Agreement may be terminated only upon the written consent of both
parties.
5.
Successors. This Agreement shall be binding on the parties and their successors and
assigns.
6.
Amendments. This agreement may not be changed orally, but only by a writing signed
by both MTW and AC.
7.
Disputes and Governing Law. Any dispute between MTW and AC concerning this
Agreement shall be adjudicated by any mutually agreeable arbitrator; otherwise, there
shall be three (3) arbitrators, one named in writing by each party to this Agreement
within five (5) days after notice of arbitration is served by either party on the other party
and the third arbitrator (who shall not be a member of either party's permanent
committee) selected by those two (2) arbitrators within five (5) days thereafter. No one
shall serve as an arbitrator who is in any way financially interested in this Agreement or
in the affairs of either party to this Agreement. Arbitrators shall be members of the
Presbyterian Church in America, and all proceedings shall be subject to the principles
of Matthew 18:15-17, 1 Corinthians 6:1-8 and the procedures of Book of Church Order
of the Presbyterian Church in America. Any costs incurred in the arbitration of a
dispute shall be paid by one or both parties, as determined by the arbitrator(s). The
parties to this Agreement specifically agree not to litigate any dispute arising out of the
Agreement in any civil court.
Committee on Mission to the World of the Presbyterian Church in America
/s/ W. Jack Williamson
3/20/90
Administrative Committee of the Presbyterian Church in America
/s/ William S. Henderson 3/23/90

199

PCADIGEST
PCA OFFICE BUll..DING
SUB-LET TENANTS

1993, p. 173, 21-64, III, 4. That the 21st General Assembly adopt as policy that no
committee or agency may move from the PCA Office Building without prior approval of the
General Assembly, or the Board of Directors of the PCA when the situation requires action
before the General Assembly meets.
Adopted
Grounds: The Administrative Committee became aware of this problem when a sub-let tenant
moved out. While this caused no difficulties with revenue, it showed the risk of future
shortfall. The building was purchased to reduce costs and was rented to gain funds to
payoff the building.

PORNOGRAPHY
(See also PART V: POSmON PAPERS, Pornography, p. 542)
1984, p. 103, 12-31, IV, 7. That Overture 54, be answered in the affirmative and that an
observer be selected, preferably from the Cincinnati area.
1984, p. 43,12-10. Overture 54 ... [That] the General Assembly meeting in Baton Rouge in
June, 1984, to send one official PCA observer to the National Consultation on Pornography and
Obscenity in Cincinnati, September 6-7, 1984 and report back to the PCA through an article in
the PCA Messenger.
1989, p. 151, 17-82, III, 4. Whereas the use of pornography is a sinful abuse of God's gift
of sexuality;
Therefore be it resolved, that the General Assembly urge all courts, committees and agencies of
the PCA to exercise care in the selection of meeting sites and suppliers.
Be it further resolved, that the General Assembly urge the members of the congregations of our
denomination, in conformity with their Biblical calling as a part of the church of Christ,
to be involved in various efforts of fighting pornography in our land. (cf M13GA, p.

133, 13-65, II, 5)
POWER OF GENERAL ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
(See GENERAL ASSEMBLY, ACl'IONS; PART II: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE
CONSTITUTION, BCO 15-1, 1985, 13-45,47, '4)
PRAYER
(See DAYS OF PRAYER AND FASTING)

PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH IN AMERICA FOUNDATION
ARTICLFS OF INCORPORATION

(See PART IV: BYLAWS, MANUALS AND GUIDELINES)
BYLAWS

(See PART IV: BYLAWS, MANUALS AND GUIDELINES)
ESTATE AND TRUST DFSIGN AND REVIEW SERVICE

1993, p. 90, 21-40, III, 3. That each local church be encouraged to consider the various
ways the Foundation can serve them. Seminars, live and video, and our Estate and Trust Design
and Review Service are available to be used to better inform God's people regarding more
effective management of God's assets.
Adopted

200

ASSEMBLY ACflONS
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH
IN AMERICA FOUNDAnON
FOUNDING AND DEVEWPMENT

1976, p. 81, 4-75, II, B, 3. That a Planned Deferred Giving Program be initiated and
established as per paper "A". (See Appendix H, p. 197)

1976, p. 197, Appendix H, Paper" A" .
REPORT OF SUBCOMMITTEE ON STEWARDSHIP
A DEFERRED GIVING MINISTRY
The purpose of this paper is to examine the question of the Presbyterian Church in
America embarking upon a ministry of deferred giving within the frame work of the overall
stewardship program of the denomination. The basic question is: Can the church participate in
a deferred giving program and still be faithful to the Word of God and be consistent with the
Confessional Standards of the church? We believe that the answer is: YES!!!
DEFERRED GIFTS DEFlNED
Simply stated, a deferred gift is a gift for which legal provision is made during the
donor's lifetime, but whose principal benefits do not accrue to the institution Wttil some future
time.
Deferred gifts are usually received upon the death of the individual donor and/or his
income beneficiary, but may be received during donor's lifetime such as an inter vivos gift.
H the gift is made upon the death of the individual it generally takes the form of a
bequest in a will, a trust fund, or life insurance. If the gift is made while the donor is living it
usually takes the form of a living trust, an annuity, or gifts of cash, stock or real estate.
THE COMMITTEE'S POSmON
In recognition of the concern for carrying the Great Commission given us by our Lord
and being of practical assistance to our constituency, the Presbyterian Church in America
should embark upon a ministry of deferred giving.
A foundation should be established to encourage, and advise our membership on their
God given responsibilities to themselves, their families and to their church. The foWtdation
should also receive, invest, and distribute gifts for the fulfilling of the ministry of the Church.
THE COMMITTEE'S REASONING
The committee believes that there is absolutely no question regarding the wisdom of the
proper planning of one's estate so as to make future provisions of an individual's family or for
making gifts to the Lord's work through the means of wills, life insurance, or inter vivos gifts.
One question of concern that must be properly handled in order to be consistent with
God's Word and the Doctrines of the Church is the correct guidelines for receiving,
administering. investing and distributing such gifts. It is evident from Scripture that wise
planning and investing for the future. as in the example of Joseph "storing up for the lean years"
in Genesis 41 and the wise investing of money by the servants in our Lord's parable of the
talents in Matthew 25:14-29 and proper ways to be just stewards of the worldly possession
given us by God. The Church of Jesus Christ can wisely invest the Lord's treasure and still not
be considered as competing "in the world's market place. "
Hence the committee recommends that strong guidelines be drawn that would:
(a)
Exclude investment in stock in the liquor, tobacco. and gambling industries and all
other stocks which would play upon a weakness of the human nature.
(b)
Establish a firm policy that prohibits the hoarding of assets beyond the liabilities of the
foWtdation and requires regular distribution thereof as prescribed by the General
Assembly.
(c)
Forbid the Church from ever assuming an active rule in a competitive business through
management, voting of stocks, or use of stock for political pressure.

201

PCADIGEST
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH
IN AMERICA FOUNDATION
We believe that the scope of the ministry of the Presbyterian Church in America within
the world is limited only by our own vision and resources. A deferred giving program would be
a great supplement to the resources of the church. It would be impossible for a deferred
program to ever raise the total operational budget of a church. The needs of our denomination
are great and the challenges and opportunities so vast that the resources needed could never be
over-subscribed; and the continued challenge to our members to regularly tithe is an absolute
necessity as the main method for the financial support of our Church. But wise use of our time,
talent and treasure in the light of Scripture demands that we provide every opportunity for
Christian liberality among our brethren; and this should include a ministry of deferred giving.
1976, p. 81, 4-75, II, B, 4. That the PCA Foundation be created by the adoption of the
enabling resolution. (See the Resolution at the end of this report.) (See paragraph 4-76. Item I,
10 for Funding provision.)
RESOLUTION ON PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH IN AMERICAN FOUNDATION
Be It Resolved
1.
That there is hereby established a Sub-Committee for a deferred giving ministry, which
Sub-Committee shall be known as:
THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH IN
AMERICAN FOUNDATION
2.
That the manual for this Sub-Committee, (See Appendix H, page 198) to this
Resolution, be and the same is hereby adopted as its operating policy.
3.
That this Manual may be amended only by a majority vote of the General Assembly.
4.
That this Sub-Committee's operations shall be supervised by the Sub-Committee on
Stewardship; and that it shall annually report to the General Assembly through the SubCommittee on Stewardship.
5.
That the Director of Stewardship Ministries shall serve as administrative and
development officer of the Foundation; and that the office of the Foundation shall be
the office of the Director of Stewardship Ministries.
6.
That the following are nominated to be the initial Trustees, to wit ...
7.
This Sub-Committee shall not be considered a Permanent Sub-Committee under Book
of Church Order, Section 15-1(12), as it relates to nominations and service.
8.
The first named trustee elected shall serve as initial convener of the Board of Trustees.
9.
That the Board of Trustees develop guidelines for operation in accordance with the
principles set forth in Paper" A " entitled "A Deferred Giving Ministry" and submit such
guidelines for review and approval at the 1977 General Assembly.
1977, p. 97, 5-96, III, B. That the Presbyterian Church in America Foundation be made a
Sub-Committee of the Committee on Administration.
Grounds:
1.
To clarify the organizational structure for the better understanding of and operation of
the PCA Foundation.
2.
To separate, to a proper degree, the types of giving ministries and opportunities existing
within the PCA.
1977, p. 234, Appendix K. The Presbyterian Church in America Foundation was
established by the Fourth General Assembly. It now operates as a Sub-Committee of the
Committee on Administration. The Foundations has been established for the promotion of
creative giving designed to promote the kingdom of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ.
The Foundation offers three avenues for wide use of a believer's financial and material
assets. The Foundation aids the Christian in (1) planning his financial future, (2) providing a
regular income for life and 93) establishing a continuing gift for the Lord's work. The
Foundation offers our constituency a means of investing their money specifically for use by a
genuinely Christian church while saving for their own later years.

202

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH
IN AMERICA FOUNDATION
1980. p. 107.8-79.111.
That an ad hoc committee be appointed by the moderator of the General Assembly, two
members from each of the Committees of the General Assembly, two members of the
Sub-committee on Stewardship, and two members of the trustees of the PCA
Foundation. The purpose of the committee will be to study the proposed plan for
operation of PCA Foundation as outlined (Appendix I, pp. 212-213) for the Eighth
General Assembly and to report to the Ninth General Assembly through the Committee
of Commissioners of PCA Foundation. That each committee and sub-committee bear
the expense of its representatives. This committee to give particular attention to the
following specific issues:
a.
Whether Foundation activities be restricted to receiving, accumulation,
managing, investing and disbursing capital funds, stocks, property, etc.
b.
If the Foundation should also be allowed to solicit funds, gifts, bequests, etc.
c.
To consider the relationship of the Foundation to the Sub-committee on
Stewardship and to the four permanent committees.
d.
Whether the Foundation should have a full-time director, and if so, what should
Adopted
his qualifications and duties be.
5.
That the ad hoc committee develop and present to the Ninth General Assembly a plan to
place the operation of the PCA Foundation under the rules for General Assembly
operation and bylaws.
Adopted
1981. p. 115. 9-56. II. B. That Ad Hoc Committee Report as assigned by the Eighth
General Assembly (M8GA, p. 107). The main thrust of the report dealt with the need of a
coordinating agency which would recommend to the General Assembly goals, strategy, and
coordinated use of funds by the major program committees to accomplish the one major mission
of the Church. It was proposed that this agency be a strengthened and enlarged Sub-committee
on Stewardship.
1983. p. 113.11-48.111.
1.
That the PCA FOlDldation become a separate agency of the church, similar to Covenant
College, Covenant Seminary, Ridge Haven, and Insurance, Annuities and Relief.
Grounds:
The PCA Foundation has a specialized ministry and a fiduciary
responsibility.
2.
That, if the PCA Foundation becomes a separate agency as recommended above, the
future funding of the PCA Foundation, starting with the 1984 budget, be provided by
each of the following agencies paying an equal share of the PCA Foundation's budget:
the four major Committees of the General Assembly, Covenant College, Covenant
Seminary and Ridge Haven.
1988. p. 132. 16-55. 111.4. That the 16th General Assembly approve the inclusion of the
Relief Fund of Insurance, Annuities & Relief as one of the Committees and Agencies
supporting and represented by the PeA Foundation. In the case of the distribution of
undesignated funds, the Relief Fund is to share in the following manner: 25% of an equal share
in FY/89 and an additional 25% share of an equal share for each fiscal year thereafter until a full
share is attained by approved.
Adopted
1993. p. 90. 21-40. III. 4. That the PCA Foundation be directed to use in the future
promotional literature the policy stated in the August 15, 1992 minutes of the PCA Foundation,
Inc. Board Meeting 08-15-3e - that "capital gains or losses for A and C accounts will be tracked
independently of original principal contributions in a capital reserve 8CCOWlt. Upon termination
of the A and C!P account net capital gains will accrue to the Foundation for its use. Net capital
losses will be charged against original principal contributions. Investment risk will be borne by
the principal of each account"
Adopted

4.

203

PCADIGEST
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH
IN AMERICA FOUNDAnON
FUNDING

1976. p. 83.4-76. I, 10. That the 1976 interest money 00 the Challenge Fund be given to
the PeA Foundation (See paragraph 4-75) for seed money to defer their administrative
expenses.
1977. p. 96. 5-96. II. It was noted that an anonymous challenge gift of $20,000 has been
offered to the General Assembly's Foundation contingent upon the Assembly's commitment of
$25,000 to the Foundation during 1978.
The Commissioners entertained the question of how the Foundation's administrative
expenses should be funded after 1978. Several concepts were discussed among which are the
following:
A.
To have the General Assembly fund the Foundation's administrative and operating
expenses as they do the Sub-Committee on Stewardship.
B.
To take a percentage "off the top" of all gifts to the Foundatioo to cover administrative
costs.
C.
To find dooors who would loan the Foundation $1,000,000 for five years interest free,
the income to cover operating expenses.
D.
To enlist individuals to contribute to the support of the Foundation's administrative
expenses; e.g. 300 individuals giving $250 per year.
This Committee suggests that the General Assembly be aware of these four possibilities, and
that they be recorded here to be considered by the Board of Trustees of the Foundation and
future Assemblies.
1979. p. 73. 7-16. III.
2.
That the 1980 budget be approved as submitted, and that the Board of Trustees be
allowed to raise the 1980 budget by private solicitation.
De/erred. Adopted par. 7-90, p. 138
5.
That beginning in the year 1981, and thereafter, the Foundation budget be included for
funding as the other committees until such time the Foundatioo becomes selfsupporting.
Adopted
1980. p. 108.8-79. III.
6.
That the Foundatioo continue to operate in 1980 in accordance with its present plan of
operation funded by contributions of $500 from each of the four permanent committees.
Adopted
8.
That the 1981 Foundation be funded by contributions from the four permanent
committees according to their ratio of sharing in undesignated gifts as determined by
the Eighth General Assembly.
Adopted
1981. p. 115.9-56, III.
6.
That the General Assembly reaffirms its earlier restricting the activity of the PCA
Foundation to receiving, accumulating, managing and disbursing capital funds, stocks,
property, etc., in the development of a program of deferred giving.
7.
That the General Assembly encourage the PCA Foundation to develop its program
around the concept of service rather than fund raising; and that the term "solicit" be
limited to the interpretation of its service to its constituents rather than any direct asking
for funds.
9.
That the PCA Foundation and the Coordinating, Planning and Stewardship Committee
eventually shall have separate full-time directors. Each organization will be responsible
to prepare a job description and qualifications for its own director which shall be
approved by the General Assembly. Each organization will nominate its own Director
for Assembly's approval. The salary of the Directors shall not exceed that of the
Coordinators of the permanent committees.

204

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH
IN AMERICA FOUNDATION

10.

That the funding of the PCA Foundation and the Coordinating, Planning and
Stewardship Committee be through the Committee on Administration; and that to
forestall a financial crisis for that Committee, the following plan be adopted:
a.
All undesignated General Assembly income be shared equally by all permanent
committees in 1982, 1983 with 25% allotted to each committee.
b.
The existing 1981 formula for support of the Stewardship Committee and PCA
Foundation be continued through 1982; the 1983 support be worked out by the
Committee on Stewardship in conjunction with MTW, MUS, and CE&P
Committees and be reported to the 1982 General Assembly.
1982, p. 116, 10-90, III, 15. That we hear and adopt the Permanent Committee's
recommendation for the 1983 support of PSCSM, and PCA Foundation.
The funding of the PCA Foundation and PSCSM be through the budget of the COA,
and that to forestall a financial crisis for that committee, the following plan be adopted:
a.
All undesignated General Assembly income be shared equally by all Permanent
Committees in 1983, with 25% allocated to each committee.
b.
The other three Permanent Committees temporarily support the funding of the PCA
Foundation and PSCSM through diminishing contributions to the Committee on
Administration according to the formula outlined below until normal funding is
attained:
1)
Any short-fall shall be attributed to PCA Foundation and PSCSM.
2)
The short-fall will be deducted from undesignated giving in equal amounts
prior to transfer to the other three committees.
3)
The deduction will be made each month when required.
4)
Any month that the year-to-date income exceeds the current year-to-date
budget, the deduction will not take place.
c.
That the funding of the PSCSM and the PCA Foundation be passed on by the COA in
an amount equal to the percentage of income to COA after receipt of shortfall funds
from the other three committees.

1983, p. 113, 11-48, III.
3.

That the unrestricted and undesignated funds received by the PCA Foundation be
dispersed equally between the following agencies; the four major Committees of the
General Assembly, Covenant College, Covenant Seminary, and Ridge Haven.
8.
That the General Assembly direct the PCA Foundation to establish procedures for
dispersing funds which were received as restricted but undesignated funds and the
donor of such funds dies before a designation for disbursement is given by that donor.
Grounds: The representative of the PCA Foundation advised that the above contingency had
not been addressed and a policy established As certain substantial gifts had been made to the
Foundation as restricted but undesignated gifts, this matter needs to be addressed.
1985, p. 131,13-64, 111,1. That the current funding of the budget (funded equally by the 4
committees and 3 agencies) be continued for another year, through June, 1986.
Adopted

1986, p. 121, 14-46, III.
7.
8.

Ridge Haven was permitted to withdraw from its participation in the PCA Foundation.
Adopted
As per the directives of the 13th General Assembly the Foundation Board of Directors
has considered the current method of funding its annual budget by the four committees
and two agencies of the PCA. Any undesignated gifts received by the Foundation are
distributed equally to the four committees and two agencies.
Adopted

MANUAL

(See PART IV: BYLAWS, MANUALS AND GUIDELINES)

205

PCADIGEST
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH
IN AMERICA FOUNDAnON
MEMORIAL GIFT PROGRAM

1977, p. 234, Appendix K. A Memorial Gift Program has been established and materials
have been distributed to every church in the Assembly. Designated gifts from this program are
distributed to the Committees so named. Undesignated funds received are accumulated and
then distributed periodically in the percentage amounts established by the General Assembly for
the four standing Committees.
1981, p. 115,9-56, III, 5. That each church be encouraged to participate in the Memorial
Gift Program.
[Note: Reaffirmed in succeeding years.]
MINUTES

1982, p. 120, 10-94, III.
That the Assembly direct the PCA Foundation to include in their minutes specific
descriptions of the recipients to which designated contributions were distributed.
4.
That the "Resolutions by Written Consent of the Board of Directors of PCA
Foundation, Inc." be approved.
1993, p. 90, 21-40, III, 4. That the PCA Foundation be directed to use in the future
promotional literature the policy stated in the August 15, 1992 minutes of the PCA Foundation,
Inc. Board Meeting 08-15-3e - that "capital gains or losses for A and C accounts will be tracked
independently of original principal contributions in a capital reserve account. Upon termination
of the A and C/P account net capital gains will accrue to the Foundation for its use. Net capital
losses will be charged against original principal contributions. Investment risk will be borne by
the principal of each account."
Adopted
3.

UNDESIGNATED GIFI'S

(See also FUNDING)
1986, p. 121, 14-46, III, 8. As per the directives of the 13th General Assembly the
Foundation Board of Directors has considered the current method of funding its annual budget
by the four committees and two agencies of the PCA. Any undesignated gifts received by the
Foundation are distributed equally to the four committees and two agencies.

PRESBYTERY
BOOK OF OBUGATIONS

1976, p. 72, 4-71, III, C. With respect to the inquiry from Rev. Crowell Cooley regarding
the signing of the Book of Obligation, it is the Committee's opinion that it is proper for a
candidate to sign at the convenience of Presbytery once he is approved by Presbytery to be
ordained or in the case of an incoming pastor when he is received by Presbytery. Until a pastor
has signed the Book of Obligation he is not a member of Presbytery.
BOUNDARIES

(See also ENROLLMENT; PART III: JUDICIAL CASES, #42)
1974, p. 62, 2-74. GUIDEUNES FOR SIZE OF PRESBYTERIES We might mention here that
Communication #3 stated: "1) after the initial formation of the Presbyteries the right of
presbytery sovereignty be acknowledged so as to prevent the diminishing or enlarging of
Presbyteries' boundaries without the direct consent of those bodies and 2) that it shall be
recommended to these courts that a) their size shall be limited, generally to a diameter of 150
miles in order to maintain Elder participation and b) that their number shall be limited,
generally, to 40 churches so that genuine fellowship may be had by all the constituting ministers
and churches. "

206

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
PRESBYTERY

I

I
I

PRESBYTERY BOUNDARIES Mter each group met separately, their recommendations to
the Committee for presbytery boundaries were these:
TEXAS - state of Texas.
LOUISIANA - LOUISIANA PRESBYTERY (Louisiana west of Mississippi River plus
West Feliciana, East Feliciana, St. Helena, East Baton Rouge, and Livingston
parishes.
GRACE - Same as PCUS Presbytery of South Mississippi plus Louisiana west to
LOUISIANA Presbytery border.
MISSISSIPPI VALLEY - same as PCUS Presbytery of Central Mississippi
COVENANT - Same as PCUS Presbytery of St. Andrew plus state of Arkansas and
Tennessee west of Tennessee River.
EVANGEL - same as PCUS Presbyteries of North Alabama, Binningham and East
Alabama.
WARRIOR - same as PCUS Presbytery of Tuscaloosa plus Washington, Clarke,
Monroe, and Conecuh counties.
GULF COAST - northwest Florida east to and including Madison and Taylor counties
plus Mobile, Baldwin, and Escambia counties in Alabama.
SOUTHERN FLORIDA - southern Florida up to Tampa/Orlando area.
CENTRAL GEORGIA - central and southern Georgia up to and including Harris,
Talbot, Upson, Lamar, Butts, Jasper, Morgan, Greene, Taliaferro, Wilkes, and
Lincoln counties.
NORTH GEORGIA - northern Georgia down to CENTRAL GEORGIA border.
CALVARY - state of South Carolina.
WESTERN NORTH CAROLINA - western North Carolina east to and including
Allegheny, Wilkes, Alexander, Caldwell, Burker, and Oeveland counties.
CAROLINA - eastern North Carolina, west to WESTERN NORTH CAROLINA
border.
MID-ATLANTIC - State of Maryland and Virginia west to and including Loudon,
Faquier, Rappahannock, Madison, Greene, Albemarle, Nelson, Amherst,
Bedford, and Pittsylvania counties, and Morgan, Jefferson and Berkley counties
in West Virginia.
NEW RIVER PRESBYTERY - West Virginia except Morgan, Jefferson and Berkley
counties and Virginia east to MID-ATLANTIC border and down to and
including Giles, Montgomery, Floyd, and Patrick counties in Virginia.
TENNESSEE VALLEY - central and southeastern Tennessee up to and including
Claiborne, Grainger, Hamblen, and Cocke counties and west to Tennessee
River.
WESTMINSTER - northeastern Tennessee down to TENNESSEE VALLEY BORDER
and southwestern Virginia up to NEW RIVER border.
*vANGUARD - state of Kentucky.
PACIFIC
(Names marked by an asterisk are merely suggestions and/or geographical designations; names
must be finally determined by each presbytery. Other names are as already determined by
existing presbyteries.)
FlJRTHER GUIDELINES We know that other presbyteries will possibly be formed - and
there will be certain situations that will need to be handled as individual cases, but in seeking to
fulfill the purpose for which this Committee was brought into being - to recommend Presbytery
Boundaries - we recommend the following:
1. That the tentative boundaries proposed in the report be approved and the effective
date be January 1, 1975 (being flexible or fluid until that time.)

207

PCADIGEST
PRESBYTERY
2. That the General Assembly recognize and insure the right of any individual church
to petition its presbytery to alter presbytery lines to exclude that particular church from the
boundaries proposed.
3. Recommend that any new work outside of present Presbytery boundaries begun after
the close of the 2nd General Assembly seek the advice of the Mission to the US Committee
before uniting with a Presbytery.
4. That, if General Assembly feels it necessary, this Committee continue to work with
any problems that might arise in this area of boundaries, until January 1, 1~5.
1975, p. 25, 3-5. The [ASCENSION] presbytery recommended the following boundaries
be set by the Assembly: Eastern border starting at the northern boundary of Pennsylvania
including the following counties: McKean, Elk, Clearfield. Blair and Bedford to the Maryland
line: Southern border, westward from the eastern boundary of Bedford COWlty, along the
Pennsylvania-Maryland line to West Virginia, then across West Virginia following the southern
boundary of Marshall County, thence southwest along the West Virginia-Ohio border to the
southernmost tip of Monroe County· in Ohio; Western and Northern boundaries combined,
including the following Ohio counties: Monroe, Belmont, Harrison, Tuscarawas and Stark,
thence north along the western border of Summit County to Interstate Route 271, thence
northeast to the intersection with the Ohio Turnpike, thence east and southeast along that state
line to Lake Erie, and then east along the Ohio Turnpike to the Ohio Pennsylvania border,
thence north along that state line to Lake Erie, and then east along the northern boundary of
Pennsylvania to the eastern border of McKean County. These boundaries were approved by the
Assembly.
The Presbytery of the Ascension was formally enrolled as a presbytery of the
Presbyterian Church in America.
1976, p. 63, 4-53, 3, e. That the General Assembly define the boundaries of PACIFIC
Presbytery as including only the following counties in the State of California: Imperial, San
Diego, Riverside, San Bernadino, Orange, Los Angeles, Ventura, Kern, Santa Barbara, San
Luis, Obispo, Tulare, Inyo, and Kings.
1977, p. 28, 5-5. The General Assembly now hear the report of the formation of a
Provisional Presbytery, the Presbytery of Central Florida, and proceed to constitute the
Presbytery of CENTRAL FLORIDA, effective this date ... Boundaries as follows: Southern
boundary be the southern border of Sarasota, Manatee, Hardee, Osceola and Brevard Counties.
Northwestern boundary be Florida State Highway 51 from Steinhatchee northeastward to 1-75
and then north to the Georgia border. Northern boundary be the Georgia border from I:..ti5
eastward to the Atlantic Ocean.
1977, p. 34,5-10. Overture 7 ... The Presbytery of the ASCENSION respectfully overtures
the Fifth General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America to amend the respective
boundaries by subtracting the counties of Garrett and Allegany, Maryland, from the Presbytery
of the MID-ATLANTIC and adding them to the Presbytery of the Ascension.
1978, p. 37, 6-1l. Overture 35 PACIFIC Presbytery overtures the Sixth General of the
Presbyterian Church in America to incorporate into the boundaries of Pacific Presbytery the
States of Arizona, Hawaii, New Mexico, Oregon, and Washington, as well as all of California.
1978, p. 77, 6-51, III, 15. That Overture 23, requesting a division of CAROLINA
Presbytery into CENTRAL CAROLINA Presbytery and EASTERN CAROLINA Presbytery be
answered in the affirmative. (See 6-89, p. 102 and map on p. 300)
1980, p. 40, 8-7. Overture 17 ... Pacific Presbytery overture[s] the Eighth General
Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America meeting in June, 1980 to form the states of
Arizona and New Mexico as a separate Presbytery effective at the conclusion of the 1980
General Assembly.
[Note: Formation of SOUTHWEST Presbytery.]

208

ASSEMBLY ACI10NS
PRESBYTERY
1980, p. 41, 8-7. Overture 20 ... The Presbytery of CENTRAL FLORIDA does overture the
8th General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America to correct the southern boundary
description of the Presbytery of Central Florida to read as Follows:
Southern boundary be the southern and eastern borders of Sarasota County, the southern portion
of the eastern border of Manatee County, the southern and eastern borders of Hardee County,
the eastern portion of the southern border of PoUc County, the southern border and the southern
portion of the eastern border of Osceola County and the Southern border of Brevard County.
1980, p. 42, 8-7. Overture 34 ... Mid-Atlantic Presbytery, meeting in its 22nd Stated
Meeting held May 9-10, 1980 in Baltimore, Maryland, in response to the requests of a majority
of the churches involved, respectfully overtures the Eighth General Assembly of the Presbytery
Church in America to erect a Presbytery [PHILADELPHIA Presbytery] in Eastern
Pennsylvania and Southern New Jersey...
1980, p. 88, 8-40, III, 22. . .. The boundaries of the [PHILADELPHIA] presbytery will
include the following counties: Philadelphia, Delaware, Chester, Montgomery, Bucks, Lehigh,
Berks, Lancaster, York, Dauphin, Lebanon, SchuyUciU, Perry Cumberland, Franklin, Adams and
North Hampton in Pennsylvania; the counties of Mercer, Ocean, Burlington, Camden, Atlantic,
Gloucester, Salem, Cumberland, and Cape May in New Jersey; and the county of New Castle in
Delaware. The ministers, churches and mission churches of the presbytery are here named;
their petitions will be provided to the Committee of Commissioners...
1981, p. 87, 9-35, III, 24. That the boundaries of the Presbytery of SIOUXLANDS are to
be the Missouri River on the west and south, the boundary with North Dakota on the north and
the boundary with Minnesota on the east.
1982, p. 84, 10-66, III, 2. That Communication #2 from the Presbytery of MIDATLANTIC concerning the transfer of Oark, Warren and Frederick Counties of Virginia from
the Presbytery of NEW RIVER to the Presbytery of Mid-Atlantic be received and that the
General Assembly direct the Presbytery of New River to act on this particular action during this
current Assembly.
[Clerk's Note: New River Presbytery concurred with this action.]
1982, p. 84, 10-66, III, 3.
That Communication #4 from the Presbytery of
PHILADELPHIA concerning the rescinding of Overture #6 by the Presbytery of Philadelphia
and their following action of
proposed boundaries with the Presbytery of DELMARVA be answered in the affirmative, and
that the General Assembly approve the suggested boundaries regarding the Presbytery of the
NORTHEASI' as contained in Communication #4 from the Presbytery of Philadelphia.
1982, p. 40,10-12, A. Communication 4: ... That in the event the "joining and receiving" of
the RPCES, the Presbytery of PHILADELPHIA consent to the boundaries proposed by the
Ninth General Assembly, with the exception that New Castle County, Delaware, be ceded to the
proposed DELMARVA Presbytery (PCA) and that presbytery recommend that Hudson, Bergen,
Passaic, Sussix, Morris, Essex, Warren, Hunterdon, Somerset, Union, Middlesex, and
Monmouth counties in New Jersey be included in the proposed NORTHEAST Presbytery
(PCA) with its permission.
1982, p. 84, 10-66, III, 5. That Overture #10 from the Presbytery of LOUISIANA
requesting the bounds of Presbytery to include all the State of Louisiana be answered in the
affirmative with the exception of St. Tammany, Tangipaho, and Washington Parishes of the
State of Louisiana which are presently in Grace Presbytery.
1982, p. 84,10-66, III, 7. That Overture #21 from the Presbytery of the SIOUXLANDS to
extend its present boundaries to include North Dakota, South Dakota, Nebraska, Iowa, and
Minnesota be answered in the affirmative.

209

PCADIGEST
PRESBYTERY
1982. p. 84. 10-66. III. 9. That Overture #23 from the Presbytery of MID-ATLANTIC
concerning the creation of a new presbytery to be known as the DELMARVA Presbytery be
answered in the affinnative with the addition of the counties of the Eastern Shore of Virginia,
subject to the approval of the combined Mid-Atlantic and Delmarva Presbyteries at their
September 10-11, 1982, meeting. Delmarva Presbytery shall consist of the following areas:
(1)
All of the state of Delaware.
(2)
All of the state of Maryland, except for Garrett and Allegheny Counties.
(3)
Washington, D.C.
(4)
The following counties of Virginia: ARomas, Arlington, Clark, Fairfax, Faquier,
Frederick, Louden, and Prince William, and the Falls Church and Manassas.
(5)
Morgan, Berkeley and Jefferson counties in West Virginia.
[Clerk's note: the combined presbyteries approved the addition of the Eastern Shore Virginia
counties to Delmarva Presbytery.)
1983. p. 36. 11-9. Communication 1 ...that the NORTHEAST Presbytery approves the
transfer of the Knowlton Presbyterian Church to the NEW JERSEY Presbytery of the PCA.
1983. p. 124.11-61. 111.18. Overture 18
1.
That the CO\Dlties of Abbeville, Anderson, Cherokee, Edgefield, Greenville,
Greenwood, Laurens, McCormick, Newberry, Pickens, Oconee, Saluda, Spartanburg,
Union, Yode, and the portion of Chester County north of South Carolina highway 97
from the Yode County line to the Chester city limits, and all of Chester County north
and west of South Carolina highway 72 from the Chester city limits to the Yode County
line be included in one presbytery [CALVARY).
2.
The counties of Aiken, Allendale, Bamberg, Barnwell, Beaufort, Berkeley, Calhoun,
Charleston, Chesterfield, Clarendon, Colleton, Darlington, Dillon, Dorchester, Fairfield,
Florence, Georgetown, Hampton, Horry, Jasper, Kershaw, Lancaster, Lee, Lexington,
Marion, Marlboro, Orangeburg, Richland, Sumter, Williamsburg, and the portion of
Chester County lying south of South Carolina highway 97 from the Yode County line to
the Chester City limits, all of the city of Chester and all that portion of Chester County
lying south and east of South Carolina highway 72 from the Chester City limits to the
Yode County line to be included in the other presbytery [PALME'ITO).
1983. p. 125. 11-61. III. 21. Overture 36 ...we hereby overture the General Assembly to
do the following:
Request Assembly to remove West Texas from TEXAS Presbytery, along a line west of
Wichita Falls, east of Abilene and San Angelo, west of Kerrville, and west of Del Rio. This
will allow (1) Texas Presbytery to concentrate its efforts in a geographic area it can reasonably
expect to reach, and (2) Allow the development of churches and a presbytery in West Texas
before the Texas Presbytery or its successors can reasonably accomplish it, through the
Assembly.
1983. p. 125. 11-61. III. 24. Personal Resolution 2 ...that the Eleventh General Assembly
of the Presbyterian Church in America change the boundary line between EASTERN and
CENTRAL CAROLINA Presbytery so that the counties of Rockingham, Guilford, Randolph,
Casewell and Alamance be included in the Central Carolina Presbytery along with the PCA
churches and ministers therein. This change is to become effective immediately following the
Eleventh General Assembly.
1983. p. 125. 11-61.111.25. Communication 7 ...that the KOREAN Presbytery in its stated
meeting during Feb. 7-11, 1983, took action to divide its presbytery into two, KOREAN
EASTERN and KOREAN SOUTHWESTERN presbyteries. The dividing line is the eastern
borders of North Dakota, South Dakota, Nebraska, Kansas, Oklahoma, and Texas.

210

ASSEMBLY ACflONS
PRESBYTERY
1984, p. 62, 12-10, B. Overture 10 ...the NORTHEAST Presbytery overtures the Twelfth
General Assembly to restructure the boundaries of the Northeast Presbytery to exclude Northern
NEW JERSEY until such time as it becomes apparent that a Metropolitan New York-New
Jersey Presbytery is needed and realistically feasible.
Be it therefore further resolved that the churches. mission work. and teaching elders in Northern
New Jersey be allowed to be transferred to the New Jersey Presbytery and that all the
geographic area in Northern New Jersey be included in the New Jersey Presbytery.
1984, p. 62,12-10, B. Overture 13 ... the NEW JERSEY Presbytery overtures the Twelfth
General Assembly to restructure the boundaries of the New Jersey Presbytery to include
Northern New Jersey until such a time as it becomes apparent that a Metropolitan New YorkNew Jersey Presbytery is needed and realistically feasible.
Be it therefore further resolved that the churches. mission worlcs. and teaching elders in
Northern New Jersey be received by the New Jersey Presbytery from the NORTHEAST
Presbytery and that all the geographic area in Northern New Jersey be included in the New
Jersey Presbytery if so permitted by the General Assembly.
1984, p. 63, 12-10, B. Overture 15 ... that the Presbytery of TEXAS overture the Twelfth
General Assembly to divide the Presbytery along a line south of the following counties from
west to east: Schleicher. Menard, McCulloch. San Saba, Lampasas. Bell. Falls. limestone.
Freestone. Anderson. Cherokee. Rusk and Shelby.
Be it further resolved that the Administration Committee of Texas Presbytery determine the
fInancial viability of the missions under the Presbytery's Mission to North America Committee
in view of the division of the Presbytery's budget; and that it make recommendations for a
period of adjustment
Be it resolved that the two areas be instructed to meet before the October meeting of Texas
Presbytery to organize with by-laws and officers. and to decide on names for the new
Presbyteries.
Be it further resolved that the division be effective on Jan. 1, 1985.
1984, p. 64, 12-10, B. Overture 21 ...EVANGEL Presbytery respectfully overtures the
Twelfth General Assembly to erect another presbytery [SOUTHEAST ALABAMA] from
among us. composed geographically of the counties in Evangel Presbytery south of but
including Chilton. Coosa, Talapoosa, and Chambers. and that the new presbytery be erected at
the January 1985 meeting of Evangel Presbytery.
1984, p. 64, 12-10, B. Overture 53 ...SAINT LOUIS Presbytery overtures the Twelfth
General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America to change the geographic boundaries
of the Saint Louis Presbytery to include the entire state of Missouri. and to change its name to
the "MISSOURI Presbytery."
1984, p. 150,12-67, III, 8. That our presbyteries be encouraged to limit their boundaries to
those geographic area5 for which they are able to take meaningful responsibility in evangelism
and church development, leaving other areas for the orchestrated action of all presbyteries
working together through the General Assembly.
1985, p. 38, 13-3. Communication 3
The Presbftery of SOUTHEAST ALABAMA. pending the concurrence of the Presbytery of
WARRIOR. requests of the General Assembly that the territory of Monroe County (containing
no PCA churches) be transferred from Warrior to Southeast Alabama. This county is by trade
patterns and highway and air travel habits much more closely related to the Montgomery area.
main population center in Southeast Alabama. than population centers in Warrior.
1985, p.Sl, 13-3. Overture 11 ...the Presbytery of SOUTHERN FLORIDA unanimously
overtures the General Assembly to allow the Covenant Presbyterian Church of Sebring, Florida
to be released and placed into the fellowship and jurisdiction of CENTRAL FLORIDA.
Be it further resolved. that we overture the General Assembly that the bounds of Presbytery be
Changed within Highlands County. Florida to be placed under the jurisdiction of the Presbytery
of Central Florida.

\

I

211

PCADIGEST
PRESBYTERY
1985, p. 52, 13-3. Overture 41 ...The LOUISIANA Presbytery respectfully overtures the
Thirteenth General Assembly to include all the Parishes (Counties) in the State of Louisiana in
the boundary of Louisiana Presbytery.
1985, p. 115, 13-49, III, 24. That the Newport, Tennessee Church be allowed to belong to
WESTERN CAROLINAS Presbytery. and that the presbyteries be respectfully requested to
consider a change in their boundaries and to indicate what the new boundary should be.
1985, p. 116, 13-49, III, 26. That Overture 21 be adopted in order to place the Hawaiian
Islands outside the boundaries of PACIFIC Presbytery. so that the work of the PCA there might
come under the supervision of the GA Committee on MNA.
1985, p. 116, 13-49, III, 27. That the Assembly proceed at this time to extend the
boundaries of NORTHEAST Presbytery to include all of New England, and that action
concerning changing boundaries in New Yode state be deferred until resolution of the issue
involving "Joining and Receiving" with the OPC.
1986, p. 117, 14-43, III, 17. That Overtures 9 and IS, p. 54 dealing with Newport, TN be
answered in the affirmative.
1986, p. 54, 14-4, B. Overture 9: From TENNESSEE VALLEY Presbytery
Therefore be it resolved that the Presbytery of Tennessee Valley in stated meeting this 8th day
of October, 1985, does hereby overture the Fourteenth General Assembly to restructure
the bounds of Tennessee Valley Presbytery and WESTERN CAROLINAS to include
Cocke County. Tennessee in the bounds of Western Carolinas Presbytery.
1986, p. 54,14-4, B. Overture 15: From WESTERN CAROLINAS Presbytery
Therefore. be it resolved that the Presbytery of the Western Carolinas in stated meeting this 9th
day of November, 1985. does hereby overture the Fourteenth General Assembly to
restructure the bounds of TENNESSEE VALLEY Presbytery and Western Carolinas
Presbytery to include Cocke County, Tennessee, in the bounds of Western Carolinas
Presbytery.
1986, p. 117,14-43, III, 18. That Overtures 22, p. 54, 33. p. 55. and 44, p. 60, dealing with
Catawba Co., NC, be answered in the affirmative.
1986, p. 54, 14-4, B. Overture 22: From CENTRAL CAROLINA Presbytery
The 23rd Stated meeting of Central Carolina Presbytery respectfully requests the 14th General
Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America to approve the transfer of Catawba County
North Carolina from the jurisdiction of the WESTERN CAROLINAS Presbytery, with the
consent of both presbyteries.
Catawba County is home for a mission wade begun by Central Carolina Presbytery. the New
Covenant Mission of Hickory NC. It is the opinion of the MNA Committee of this presbytery
that the New Covenant Church belongs to the Asheville-Black Mountain marketing area. Also,
its culture is so dissimilar to the Central Piedmont area of our presbytery that its interests would
be better served in the Western Carolinas Presbytery.
So, with the consent of both presbyteries and the mission church, we make this request.
1986, p. 55, 14-4, B. Overture 33: From WESTERN CAROLINAS Presbytery
We overture the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America to (redraw) change
the boundaries of Western and CENTRAL CAROLINAS Presbyteries by excluding Catawba
County from Central Carolina Presbytery and placing it in the bounds of Western Carolinas
Presbytery.
1986, p. 60,14-4, B. Overture 44: From Western Carolina Presbytery
We request (overture) the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America to redraw
the boundaries of CENTRAL and WESTERN CAROLINA Presbytery so as to include Catawba
County in Western Carolina Presbytery.
1986, p. 117, 14-43, III, 19. That Overture 39, p. 59 dealing with PHILADELPHIA
Presbytery be answered in the affirmative.

212

ASSEMBLY ACI10NS
PRESBYTERY
1986, p. 59, 14-4, B. Overture 39: From PHILADELPHIA Presbytery
Therefore. be it resolved that the Philadelphia Presbytery of the PCA meeting on March 14.
1986, in Philadelphia respectfully overtures the Fourteenth General Assembly of the
Presbyterian Church in America to divide our presbytery into two. This division would
take place on January I, 1987.
The new western presbytery would be known as the SUSQUEHANNA VALLEY
Presbytery. Its territory would include the following counties of Pennsylvania: Centre, Union,
Northumberland, Montour. Columbia, Schuylldll. Berlcs. Lebanon. Dauphin. Snyder, Juniata,
Perry, Cumberland, Mifflin, Huntindon. Fulton. Franklin. Adams. York. Lancaster. and all that
part of Chester County west of a line going south on Route. 41. Route. 796, and Route 896.
The new eastern presbytery would be known as the Philadelphia Presbytery. Its
Philadelphia, Bucks.
territory would include the following counties of Pennsylvania:
Northampton, Lehigh, Montgomery, Delaware, and all that part of Chester County east of a line
going south on Route 41, Route 796, and Route 896.
It is agreed by both Presbyteries that if the Orthodox Presbyterian Church decides to
join and be received by the PCA, and if the OPe Philadelphia Presbytery so desires, the
territories of both Presbyteries will be expanded to include all of eastern Pennsylvania. This
would add Potter. Tioga. Bradford, Sullivan, Lycoming, Clinton. and Cameron counties to the
Susquehanna Valley Presbytery. Carbon, Monroe, Pike. Wayne. Susquehanna, Wyoming,
Lackawanna. and Luzerne counties would be added to the Philadelphia Presbytery.
1986, p. 117, 14-43, III, 21. That Overture 38, p. 58 be answered in the affirmative and
TEXAS be added into KOREAN CENTRAL.
[Note: The addition of Texas was not approved by the Presbytery and therefore cannot be
added by General Assembly.]
1986, p. 58, 14-4, B. Overture 38: From Korean Eastern Presbytery
Therefore, the Korean Eastern Presbytery respectfully overtures the 14th General Assembly to
divide the Korean Eastern Presbytery establishing three presbyteries:

1.

2.

KOREAN EASTERN Presbytery
Pennsylvania
New Jersey
Metropolitan Wilmington. DE
New York
Connecticut

Rhode Island

New Hampshire
Massachusetts
Vermont
Maine

A KOREAN CENTRAL Presbytery
Ohio
Michigan
Indiana
Illinois
Missouri

Kansas
North Dakota
Nebraska
Iowa
Wisconsin
Minnesota
South Dakota

Arkansas
3.

I
1

i

A KOREAN SOUTH Presbytery
Maryland
Washington D.C.
West Virginia
Virginia
Delaw.. ;.~ (except Wilmington)

North Carolina
South Carolina
Mississippi
Alabama
Georgia
Florida

Tenn~

213

PCADIGEST
PRESBYTERY
1987, p. 125, 15-60, III, 13. That Presbytery boundaries will continue to be drawn
according to policy established by the General Assembly (M12GA, 12-67, ill, 8), with the added
assurance that the MNA Committee of the General Assembly be expected to continue to work
in cooperation and communication with those judicatories that ace closest to any new church
development project that is outside the boundaries of any presbytery, taking into consideration
that regions are formed by such things as economic ties, topography, cultural affinity, traffic
patterns, etc. It is also to be recognized that, while the primary responsibility of a presbytery is
to develop the church within its own boundaries, a presbytery could feel free to develop works
outside their boundaries while working in cooperation and communication with the MNA
Committee of the General Assembly.
1988, p. 61,16-3, B. Overture 4: From CENTRAL CAROLINA Presbytery
Therefore, Central Carolina Presbytery, meeting in its 30th Stated Meeting, July 18, 1987,
overtures the 16th GA to transfer Cleveland County to the jurisdiction of Central
Carolina Presbytery at the concurrence of WESTERN CAROLINA Presbytery.
Answered in the affirmative (p. 143, 16-63, ill, 12)
1988, p. 62,16-3, B. Overture 20: From the Presbytery of NEW RNER
Therefore be it resolved that the Presbytery of New River does overture the Sixteenth General
Assembly to restructure the bounds of New River Presbytery and JAMES RIVER
Presbytery to include the counties of Augusta, Rockingham, Page, Shenandoah, and
Warren in the bounds of James River Presbytery. Answered in the affirmative (p. 143,
16-63, ill, 14).
1988, p. 62,16-3, B. Overture 21: From the Presbytery of NEW RNER
Therefore, be it resolved that the Presbytery of New River does overture the Sixteenth General
Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America to redraw the bounds of New River
Presbytery and JAMES RIVER Presbytery to include the county of Rockbridge,
Virginia in James River Presbytery. Answered in the affirmative (p. 143, 16-63, ill,
14).
1988, p. 63, 16-3, B. Overture 26: From MISSOURI Presbytery
Therefore be it resolved, that Missouri Presbytery be reduced in size on 1/1/89 by the transfer of
the Missouri counties of Atchinson, Nodaway, Worth, Harrison, Gentry, Holt, Andrew,
DeKalb, Daviss, Buchanan, Clintoo, Caldwell, Platte, Clay, Ray, Jackson, Lafayette,
Cass and Johnson, encompassing the area of Kansas City and St. Joseph, to the new
Presbytery of Iowa, Kansas and Nebraska;
Be it further resolved, that Missouri Presbytery be further reduced in size on 1/1/89 by the
transfer of the Missouri counties of Jasper, Lawrence, Green. Newton, Christian,
McDonald, Barry, Stone and Taney, encompassing the area of Springfield and the
Ozark region, to the MID-AMERICA (Oklahoma) Presbytery. Answered in the
affinnative (p. 144, 16-63, ill, 20).
1988, p. 63,16-3, B. Overture 28: From the KOREAN SOUTHWESTERN Presbytery
Therefore, the Korean Southwestern Presbytery respectfully overtures the 16th General
Assembly to divide the Korean Southwestern Presbytery establishing two presbyteries:
Korean Southwestern Presbytery to include: California, Nevada, Oregoo, Idaho,
Washington, Montana, Wyoming, Colorado, New Mexico, Arizona and Utah.
KOREAN SOUTHERN Presbytery to include: Texas, Oklahoma, Louisiana and
Arkansas.
Answered in the affirmative (p. 145, 16-63, ill,.26).
1988, p. 143, 16-63, III, 13. That Overture 13, p. 61, from NORTHEAST Presbytery be
answered in the affirmative with the goal of a future New York Metro Area Presbytery.
1988, p. 143, 16-63, III, IS, B. The churches located in boundary counties be allowed to
change membership from the bounds of one presbytery to the bounds of the adjacent presbytery
without change of presbytery geographical boundaries, with the consent of both presbyteries
involved and ~at such action be reported to the General Assembly. "

214

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
PRESBYTERY
1988, p. 143, 16-63, III, 16 and 17. That all presbyteries be requested to study their
boundaries in FY 89 because:
a.
It is both orderly and cost effective to periodically consider boundary changes in
concert with contiguous presbyteries and at a time when other PCA presbyteries are
considering changes.
b.
Most presbyteries have not examined their boundaries by applying the following
suggested Guidelines for Presbytery Boundaries received by the 15th General
Assembly in 1987:
(1)
A presbytery should have a radius of 21/2 hours maximum driving distance.
(2)
A presbytery should have a minimum of 10 churches.
(3)
A presbytery should have a total communicant membership of at least 1000.
(4)
Presbytery boundaries should not partition metropolitan areas.
(5)
A presbytery should have regional cohesiveness.
(6)
A presbytery should have at least 3 churches each having a membership of at
least 125 communicant members.
(7)
Presbytery boundaries should such that its member churches have the potential
for shared ministries.
(8)
Presbytery boundaries should be such that its member churches have a common
commitment to the region within the boundaries and sense their shared
responsibility to cover the region with the gospel.
(9)
When a presbytery reaches 30 churches, it should consider whether subdivision
would lead to more effective ministry.
Reasons:
(0
It is often to the advantage of very large presbyteries to subdivide for
more efficient oversight and closer cooperation.
(ii)
Additional presbyteries are urgently needed in most of the United
States, other than the South, and in Canada in order to make the
Presbyterian system of government operate efficiently. A presbytery in
an area where the PCA is not particularly strong could be viable with as
few as ten churches, and even with less. (The first presbytery in this
land had but seven.)
(10)
A presbytery should limit its boundaries to that geographic area for which it is
able to take meaningful responsibility for evangelism and church development.
Reason: M12GA, 12-67, 111,8
(11)
We acknowledge the existence of language presbyteries.
(12)
We recognize the "ideal" nature of guidelines such as these and understand that
several existing presbyteries do not presently meet all of them.
1988, p. 144, 16-63, III, 19. That Overture 14, p. 61, dealing with presbytery boundaries
from SIOUXLANDS Presbytery be answered in the affirmative.
1988, p. 61, 16-3, B. Overture 14: From the Presbytery of SIOUXLANDS
Whereas, the Presbytery of Siouxlands has a desire to work in accord with other brethren of the
PCA Presbyteries in the midwestern United States:
Therefore Be It Resolved, that the Presbytery of Siouxlands be reduced in size to include only
the States of North Dakota, South Dakota and Minnesota, effective January 1, 1989;
and,
Be It Further Resolved that a new Presbytery [Note: This presbytery took the name
HEARTLAND] be authorized, effective January 1, 1989, to include the States of
Nebraska, Kansas, Iowa and the Missouri counties of Harrison, Davies, Caldwell, Ray,
Lafayette, Johnson, Cass, Platte, Jackson, Clay, Dekalb, Atchinson, Andrew, Gentry,
Holt, Worth, Nodaway, Clinton and Buchanan.

215

PCADIGEST
PRESBYTERY
1988, p. 144, 16-63, III, 21. That COVENANT Presbytery be encouraged to give the
Arkansas COtDlties in the northwest comer of the state (Fayetteville, Charleston, Forth Smith) to
MID-AMERICA (Oklahoma) Presbytery; and in. order that the significant Refonned
University Ministries work at the University of ArkaMas not be hindered, that jurisdiction for
this work be a definite part of this agreement between Covenant and Mid-America
(Oklahoma) Presbyteries. (We recommend that the advice of the Subcommittee on Presbytery
Boundaries be received and adhered to with concurrence of Covenant Presbytery.)
1988, p. 144, 16-63, III, 22. That Overture 17, p. 61, dealing with presbytery boundaries
from the Presbytery of MID-AMERICA (or by whatever name it may be called after January 1,
1989) be answered in the affinnative as amended:
Therefore Be It Resolved that the Presbytery of Mid-America be reduced to include the
churches in the state of Oklahoma, effective January 1, 1989, and
Be It Further Resolved, that Presbytery of Mid-America (or by whatever name it may be called
after January 1, 1989) be authorized, effective January 1, 1989, to include the
southwestern Missouri COWlties of Green, Christian, Taney, Lawrence, Stone, Barry,
Jasper, Newton and McDonald together with the northwestern Arkansas counties of
Boone, Newton, Johnson, Logan, Sebastian, Franklin, Crawford, Washington, Madison,
Carroll and Benton.
Adopted at the Called Meeting of the Presbytery of Mid-America, on February 19, 1988 at
Tulsa, Oklahoma.
1992, p. 72, 20-23, II, B, 2. That the General Assembly respond in the affinnative to the
request of the Korean Southeastern Presbytery (Overture 9) that the presbytery be divided into
two.
a.
KOREAN CAPITAL Presbytery (tentative designation) including Maryland, Virginia
and West Virginia.
b.
KOREAN SOUTHEASTERN Presbytery (the continuing presbytery) including North
and South Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, and Florida.
1992, p. 73, 20-23, II, B, 3. That the General Assembly respond in the affinnative to the
request of LOUISIANA Presbytery (Overture 13) to fonn a new Presbytery of SOUTHEAST
LOUISIANA, effective December 31, 1992, to include the parishes of Ascension, Assumption,
East and West Baton Rouge, East and West Feliciana, Iberville, Jefferson, Lafourche,
livingston, Orleam, Plaquemines, Point Coupee,. St.. Bernard, St. Charles, St. Helena, St
James, St John the Baptist, Terrebonne, St Tammany, Tangipahoa and Washington. The last
three parishes are currently within the bounds of Grace Presbytery, and through Communication
1 that presbytery concurs with Overture 13 from Louisiana Presbytery.
1992, p. 74,20-23, II, B, 4. That the General Assembly respond in the affinnative to the
request of the Presbytery of the ASCENSION (Overture 24) to divide the presbytery into two,
with the boundary between them to be along the northern border of the following counties: in
Ohio--Tuscarawas, Carroll, and Columbiana; and in Pennsylvania -- Washington, Allegheny,
Westmoreland, Indiana, Cambria, and Blair. [Note: Northern portion - Ascension Presbytery;
Southern portion - PrITSBURGH Presbytery] This division to be effective January 1, 1993.
1992, p. 75, 20-23, II, B, 5. That the General Assembly respond in the affinnative to the
request of the KOREAN SOUTHWEST Presbytery (Overture 26) to divide the presbytery into
two:
a.
Korean Southwest Presbytery -- all of the California COWlties south of and including the
counties of Inyo, Kern, and Santa Barbara.
b.
KOREAN NORTHERN CALIFORNIA Presbytery [Note: changed to KOREAN
NORTHWEST] -- all of the California counties north of and including the counties of
San Luis Obispo, Kings, Tulare, Fresno, and Mono.

216

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
PRESBYTERY
BOUNDARIES, NONGEOGRAPIDCAL

(See KOREAN LANGUAGE PRESBYTERIES; PART IT: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE
CONSTITUTION, BCO 11-4, 1982, 10-77)
CO~ION FOR ORDINATION

1979, p. 127,7-62, III, E. Presbytery granted a session authority to appoint a commission
for ordination. A commission for ordination m~ be appointed directly by the Presbytery, and
this authority cannot be delegated. The Committee recommends that the General Assembly
inform the Presbytery that a commission for ordination must be appointed directly by the
Presbytery.
DlACONAL MINISTRIES

(See DEACONS, ADVISORY COUNcn..s)
ENROUMENT
(See also BOUNDARIES; PART m: JUDICIAL CASES, '42)

1973, p. 11, 1-2. (The First Assembly at Birmingham was composed of commissioners
from the following 16 presbyteries: Calvary, Central Georgia, Covenant, Evangel, Gold Coast,
Grace, Gulf Coast, Mid-Atlantic, Mississippi Valley, North Georgia, Tennessee Valley, Texas,
Vanguard, Warrior, Western Carolinas, Westminster.)
1974, p. 42, 2-20. Ruling Elder Robert C. Cannada, member of the Board of Directors
presented the following resolution, which was adopted:
For and on behalf of, and as representative of the Board of Directors, I move that the Second
General Assembly does hereby fonnally enroll the following Presbyteries as presbyteries of the
National Presbyterian Church in accordance with the resolution of affiliation adopted by each
presbytery, and that a copy of each resolution be placed in the Minutes of the Assembly, to wit,
1. Calvary
11. North Georgia
2. Carolina
12. Pacific
3. Central Georgia
13. Southern Florida
4. Covenant
14. Tennessee Valley
5. Evangel
15. Texas
6. Grace
16. Vanguard
7. Gulf Coast
17. Warrior
8. Mid-Atlantic
18. Western Carolina
9. Mississippi Valley
19. Westminster
10. New River
and that any such presbytery that has not formally presented a copy of such resolution of
affiliation to the Stated Clerk be authorized to do so, and that if such resolution as submitted is
substantially in the fonn of that recommended by the Board of Directors, pursuant to the
Board's Minutes of April 15-16, 1974, appearing on page 12 and following in the Handbook,
that same be approved and entered in the Minutes of this Assembly (See Appendix B for Board
Minutes, pp. 95-108) (See Appendix C for copies of the Presbytery resolutions, pp. 109-125).
1975, p. 23, 3-5. The Clerk reported that in accord with the instructions of the Second
General Assembly the Presbytery of Louisiana was organized on February 7, 1975, at
Alexandria, Louisiana. The following Resolution of Affiliation with the Presbyterian Church in
America was presented, and the Presbytery of Louisiana was formally enrolled as a presbytery
of the Presbyterian Church in America.

217

PCADIGEST
PRESBYTERY
1975, p. 25, 3-5. The Clerk yielded the floor to the Rev. David Nicholas, Chainnan of the
Committee of Commissioners on Mission to the United States, who made a partial report for the
Committee on the reception of the new Presbytery of the Ascension. The Rev. Larry Mills,
Coordinator for the Committee on Mission to the United States reported the fonnation of the
Presbytery of the Ascension on July 29, 1975, at Robert Morris College, temporary home of
Providence Presbyterian Church, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
1976, p. 64, 4-56, VII. That the Fourth General Assembly state its intent to form a
presbytery generally within the bounds of Northeast and Central Florida at the Fifth General
Assembly and that the Fourth Assembly encourage churches and teaching elders within these
bounds to meet at least twice before the Fifth Assembly to lay the foundation for organization of
the new presbytery. These actions shall be under the guidance of the Permanent Committee of
the Mission to the United States.
1977, p. 28,5-5. The Rev. Harold Patteson, Chainnan of the Committee on Administration
and of the Board of Directors, presented the following report:
The Board of Directors of the Presbyterian Church in America met on April 16, 1977, at the
Atlanta Airport and took the following action to approve the request from Vanguard and
Tennessee Valley Presbyteries that they be united into one Presbytery under the name of
Tennessee Valley Presbytery.
1979, p. 69, 7-11. Resolutions were presented from the Central Carolina Presbytery and the
Eastern Carolina Presbytery as new presbyteries of the Presbyterian Church in America as
authorized by the Sixth General Assembly (6-51).
1980, p. 88, 8-40, III, 22. That the General Assembly now hear the report of the fonnation
of a Provisional Presbytery in the Northeast, and grant the presbytery, upon the date of its
fonnal organization, September 19, 1980, the right to choose a name and be thereafter a
separate presbytery of this Assembly ...
1981, p. 69, 9-15.
2.
That Communication 2 (9-10, p. 2:7) from the Provisional Presbytery of the Siouxlands
be approved, and that the General Assembly now hear the report of the fonnation of a
Provisional Presbytery called Siouxlands in the State of South Dakota.
3.
That Communication 3 (9-10, p. 28) from the Presbytery of the Southwest be approved.
4.
That the General Assembly welcome the Presbytery of the Southwest and the
Presbytery of Philadelphia, both of which were approved by the Eighth General
Assembly, and the Presbytery of the Siouxlands into the family of the Presbyterian
Church in America.
1982, p. 90, 10-66, III, 24, a. That the Assembly hear and act upon the requests that a
Presbytery of Northern Dlinois be established.
1983, p. 124, 11-61, 111,18. Overture 18
...Calvary Presbytery respectfully requests the Eleventh General Assembly of the Presbyterian
Church in America, at the meeting in June, 1983, to divide Calvary in the following manner:
(...The southern presbytery has adopted the name of Palmetto. The other presbytery continues
to use the name Calvary.)
... 3. That the General Assembly authorize these Presbyteries to become effective on January 1,
1984.
INCORPORATION

(See INCORPORATION, PRESBYTERIES; PART V: POSmON PAPERS, Church/State, II,

pp. 118-122)

218

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
PRESBYTERY
KOREAN LANGUAGE PRESBYTERIES

(See also BOUNDARIES, 1983, 11-61,25; 1986,14-43,21; 1986, p. 58,14-4, B; 1988, p. 63,
16-3, B; 1992,20-23,2; PART II: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCO 114, 1982, 10-77)
1982. p. 92. 10-66.111.24. b. That a nongeographical Korean Language Presbytery be now
approved.
Adopted
KOREAN LANGUAGE PRESBYTERY
That the General Assembly now hear the report of the formation of a provisional
presbytery, called the Korean Language Presbytery, and grant that presbytery the right to
organize itself in conformity with the Book of Church Order. All ministers and churches are at
present members of various presbyteries in the PCA, and these presbyteries are requested to
transfer the ministers and churches when they apply for transfer to the new presbytery.
A.
Conditions
The following conditions will apply to the Korean Language Presbytery when it is
organized:
1.
The boundaries of the presbytery will be according to the needs of the Korean
churches and will be superimposed on existing presbyteries.
2.
The language used in the presbyteries will be Korean but it will be understood
that all presbytery minutes and .other documents and correspondence which the
General Assembly must read will be translated into English for the benefit of
the General Assembly.
3.
Any Korean church will have the freedom to join the Korean Language
Presbytery, or remain in the English-speaking presbytery. Any Korean church
applying for membership in the PCA may submit its application to whichever
presbytery it prefers.
4.
Pennission for separate language presbyteries will be for a period of 10 years.
At the end of that time, permission can be extended for other 10-year periods as
deemed necessary.
B.
Requests
1.
General Assembly asks each presbytery that is affected by one presbytery being
superimposed on another to grant automatic privilege of the floor, but without
vote, to all members of the other presbytery living within its geographical
bounds.
2.
The General Assembly requests all of these presbyteries that are affected to
exchange fraternal delegates for at least one regular meeting each year, these
delegates to report on the state of their presbytery, especially pointing out
causes for thanksgiving to God for His blessinp and likewise causes for which
all should together join in fervent prayer to our God for His help.
3.
The General ASsembly encourages all presbyteries where there are both
Korean-speaking and English-speaking congregations to make every effort to
have joint participation in leadership training, various other general meetings
and seminars, and especially in ministries to the young people and students.
C.
Rationale
1.
At present there are over 600,000 Koreans who have inmigrated to the United
States. Most of them came to this country since 1965. The number is uncertain
but estimates of churches among these people range from 1,000 to 1,300.
2.
Because the Presbyterian Church is the largest church in Korea, the vast
majority of Korean churches in the United States are oriented toward
Presbyterianism. However, there is great instability among these churches for
various reasons too complicated to enumerate here.

219

PCADIGEST
PRESBYTERY
3.

These Korean churches tend to be conservative in theology and evangelical in
character.
They believe the Bible to be the inerrant Word of God.
Furthennore, they accept the Confession of Faith as the standard of doctrine.
We wonder why they don't floclc to the PCA because of its theological stance,
and a careful analysis will show that there is a great amount of frustration
among these churches and ministers. They need the stability of a denomination
such as the PCA, but language problems make it very difficult for them to
participate in the courts of the church. Probably more important, however, are
cultural differences which make many of the discussions in the church courts
irrelevant to them. On the other hand, these same differences rule out
discussions that would be very meaningful to them.
4.
There are many situations in this country where work could be started among
Koreans, but the effort would be much more successful if the administration of
these efforts were in the hands of Koreans. There is no doubt that the funds for
such work could be raised if the work were in Korean hands and if Koreans
were helping to raise the funds particularly in Korean churches.
5.
Leadership is essential to the strength and stability of presbyteries as well as the
individual church. A language presbytery will provide the environment
necessary for such leadership to develop.
6.
An important purpose of this structure is to promote the unity of the church
while at the same time making room for the rich diversity which we find among
Christians of different cultural heritages. This will help us all to stay close to
the Scriptures and the creed while at the same time permit the development of
leadership and vision among a group of people who have the same faith but a
very different cultural background.
7.
In the future as second and third generation Koreans come to positions of
leadership in the Korean churches, this structure, with its built-in
reconsideration plan, can be phased out if that seems to be needful.
[Clerk's Note: See BCD 11-4, 1982, 10-77, p. 107 for advice of the Permanent Sub-Committee
on Judicial Business as to the constitutionality of a "nongeographica1 presbytery." Action on
24. b. was taken in 10-77, p. 107.]
1987, p. 207,15-96, III, 19, a.
1.
A new translation of the BCD into Korean be made by the Assembly and each Korean
presbytery ratify it prior to the 17th General Assembly. That the translatioo be funded
by designed funds to the Stated Clerk's Office. That CFJP be instructed to make
available BCD and amendments in Korean at the cost for English versions - any extra
being subsidized in CFJP's Budget.
2.
Each Korean presbytery should check its current bylaws or standing rules for
conformity to the BCD.
3.
New English translations of each presbytery's rules be submitted to Committee on
Review and Control prior to the 17th General Assembly.
4.
Each Korean presbytery should appoint a representative to certify the English
translation of all Korean minutes submitted to Committee on Review and Control.
1992, p. 70, 20-23, II, B, 1.
Whereas the PCA Korean churches have been uniquely blessed by God and are the most rapidly
growing segment of the PCA, and
Whereas the 10th General Assembly approved the organization of nongeographical Korean
Language Presbyteries for a ten-year period, subject to extension by the Assembly
(Minutes, 9th GA, 10-66 m 24.b p. 92), and
Whereas that ten-year period concludes in 1992, and

220

ASSEMBLY ACfIONS
PRESBYTERY
Whereas God has richly blessed the Korean churches with growth during this decade so that at
this ten-year made there are now five Korean Language Presbyteries with a total of
forty-one churches, fifty-three missions, and one-hundred and thirty-nine teaching
elders; and
Whereas the existence of language presbyteries has been a most effective means of assisting
growth among Korean churches and a primary bridge between the anglo PCA and
emerging second and third generation Korean leaders who come into the PCA;
Therefore, the MNA Committee of Commissioners recommends that the General Assembly
extend the organization of nongeographical Korean Language Presbyteries with the
following conditions (1-4 previously approved by the 10th GA):
1.
The boundaries of the presbytery will be according to the needs of the Korean churches
and will be superimposed on existing presbyteries.
2.
The language used in the presbyteries will be Korean but it will be understood that all
presbytery minutes and other documents and correspondence which the General
Assembly must read will be translated into English foe the benefit of the General
Assembly.
3.
Any Korean church will have the freedom to join the Korean Language Presbytery, or
the English-speaking presbytery. Any Korean church applying for membership in the
PCA may submit its application to whichever presbytery it prefers.
4.
Permission for separate language presbyteries will be foe a period of five years. At the
end of that time, permission can be extended foe other five-year periods as deemed
necessary.
5.
Furthermore, the Committee of Commissioners recommends encouraging Presbyteries
in close geographical proximity to Korean Language Presbyteries to make a concerted
effort to have fellowship with Korean Presbyteries.
Adopted as amended
RATIONALE:
1.
Since the Korean Language Presbyteries are composed of mostly first generation
Korean churches, there remains a cultural/language need to continue language
presbyteries until second generation Korean churches come into being.
2.
The five Korean Language Presbyteries themselves are requesting the extension.
3.
The first two sections of the BCO -- the Form of Government and Rules of Discipline -have been translated into Korean and time is now needed for Korean presbyteries to
adjust to the BCO standards.
4.
Historically, it has taken churches from other subcultures three generations to assimilate
into American church culture. Time and energy is needed to bring the Korean churches
to a point where they feel a part of the PCA.
In answer to the concerns of the Committee on Review of Presbytery Records (Minutes 19th
GA, 19-70-ID, p. 176) the MNA Committee reports that the translation of both the BCO
(through the Rules of Discipline) and the RAO have been completed; and the MNA Committee
reports that the translation of the minutes of the five Korean presbyteries has been completed.
1992, p. 262, 20-71, IV, 1. Report of Review of Presbytery Records Committee:
Concerning the Korean Language Presbyteries:
The Committee is happy to report that all five of the Korean Language Presbyteries
have made a sincere effort to provide translations of all of their Minutes foe the past year. The
Committee recommends that the Assembly thank and commend these Presbyteries foe their
effort to comply with the Book 0/ Church Ortier, and the Rules lor Assembly Operation. They
are to be encouraged to continue this good beginning.
'

221

PCADIGEST
PRESBYTERY
There are a number of areas in which the Korean Language Presbyteries are not yet in
full confonnity with our Book of Church Order. No doubt this grows out of the fact that the
Assembly has not provided a good translation of the BCO and of the Rules of Assembly
Operation. It is our understanding that both have now been translated through the good labors
of TE Daniel Kim of MNA staff, TE Do Won Park, TE Hosea Kim, TE Heewan Song, TE
Byung Soo Choi, TE Paul Kim, and TE Dwight Lintoo. The Committee recommends that the
General Assembly express its thanks to these men foe their good work.
The Committee has chosen to categorize all exceptions to the Korean Language
Presbytery minutes as exceptions of form oe notations. This decision was viewed as the best
vehicle for lovingly and helpfully dealing with errors that may have.been rooted in the lack of a
Korean translation of the BCO and RAO. 1be Committee commends to the General Assembly
our specific recommendations regarding how the PeA can further assist our Korean brothers in
Christ to document their kingdom work in conformity with PeA guidelines.
To assist the Korean Language Presbyteries to make progress in these areas, the
Committee recommends that the Assembly direct the Stated Oede of the General Assembly to
schedule an annual meeting of the Korean Language Presbytery clerks. The cost of this
meeting is to be borne by the respective presbyteries. The Assembly further directs that TE Dan
Kim of the MNA staff serve as a consultant to this meeting. He is also to be requested to
continue to assist the Korean Presbytery Clerks in getting their minutes ready for the Assembly.
The responsibility for the translation of the various Presbytery minutes remains with the
Presbyteries. TE Dan Kim is encouraged to provide a brief dictionary of technical terms to be
used for recording minutes. He is also encouraged to provide a sample set of minutes both in
Korean and English in consultation with officers of the Committee on the Review of Presbytery
Records. Dr. Kim is further asked to develop a training program to assist Korean Language
Presbyteries properly to examine candidates.
To provide for better continuity of the record keeping, the Committee recommends that
the Korean Language Presbyteries elect their clerks to terms of at least three to five years. The
Korean Language Presbyteries should send representatives to the Committee on Review of
Presbytery Records.
It is recommended that a Korean translation of this motion be provided the Korean
Language Presbyteries.
1993, p. 254, 21·78, IV, 1. The Committee continues to note the progress of the Korean
Language Presbyteries as to the review of their minutes. It is believed that translating the
Korean minutes into English as done last year, for the first time, is counterproductive due to the
excessive expenditure of time and resources involved.
Therefore, the Committee recommends that the minutes of the Korean Language
Presbyteries due to be submitted to the Twenty First General Assembly be reviewed in the
Korean language by representatives of the Korean Language Presbyteries as considered by the
Nineteenth General Assembly. A preliminary review will be accomplished by September of
this year, and the review will be completed at the annual meeting of the Korean Language
Presbytery stated clerks in November. The completed translation of the BCO and RAO into the
Korean language with mirrored pages in English should greatly facilitate the work.
Encouragement and assistance will be provided by the Stated Clerk of General
Assembly, Dr. Daniel Kim, representing Mission to North America Committee, and the
Chairman of the Committee on Review of Presbytery Records. The outcome of this effort will
be presented to General Assembly in June of 1994 through the Committee on Review of
Presbytery Records.
Adopted

222

ASSEMBLY AcrIONS
PRESBYTERY
MINUTES

Excepdons to
1987, p. 219, 15-96, V, B, 4. That the use of "Rev." in presbytery minutes not be treated as
an exception.
1993, p. 255, 21-78, IV, 3. That the General Assembly inform the stated clerks of
presbyteries of the following:
The following are exceptions of substance ancVor form contained in minutes presented
to the 20th General Assembly and frequently repeated in minutes presented to the 21st General
Assembly:
a)
Failure to list ministers and churches on presbytery roll who have unexcused absences;
b)
Failure to note the quorum of a commissioo;
c)
Failure to note that a congregational meeting was held to concur with the request of the
pastor to dissolve the pastoral relatiooship;
d)
Failure to attach minutes of commissions (ordination, installatioo, organization,
adjudication, etc.) and to approve such minutes;
e)
Failure properly to record votes when more than a simple majority is required;
f)
Lack of annual reports of candidates and ministers laboring out of bounds, and of
reports of interns at each stated meeting;
g)
Failure to list exceptions to sessional records and responses to such exceptions;
h)
Failure to include changes in terms of calls to ministers.
The Committee has also found that these additional errors frequently appear in presbytery
minutes:
a)
The motion to lay on the table is frequently misused (see Robert's Rules of Order, §
17);
b)
The minutes of a called meeting should record verbatim the portion of the call stating
the purpose of the meeting (RAO 14-10. d. 2.);
c)
A motion to receive a committee report is in error. A motion to adopt a report as a
whole indicates that presbytery endorses every word of the report, including the
indicated facts and its reasoning, as its own statement; in such a case the entire report
should be published with the minutes (Robert's Rules o/Order, § 50).
The Committee further recommends presbyteries adopt the following practices:
a)
That, when a committee is acting with the power of a commission in accordance with a
standing rule, the rule be cited in the text of the minutes where such action is reported.
b)
That each set of minutes be approved before the end of the next stated meeting (RAO
14-10. c. 5.).
c)
That presbyteries follow the recommendation of RAO 14-10. d. 3. to number their
paragraphs consecutively and to give a title over each paragraph indicating the cootent
of the business included in that paragraph.
Adopted
Review of
(See also PART ill: JUDICIAL CASES, #52)
1981, p. 147, 9-70, V, 2. That Overture 18 from the Presbytery of the Ascension be
answered in the affirmative.
1981, p. 45, 9-10. Overture 18
Whereas, the oversight of presbyteries by review of minutes is a very important part of the
function of the General Assembly; and
Whereas, this task grows larger and larger each year with the addition of presbyteries and the
multiplication of presbytery meetings and business; and

223

PCADIGEST
PRESBYTERY
Whereas, the utilization of a General Assembly committee of commissioners seems to be less
than ideal in several ways, namely,
a.
A lack of adequate time at the annual General Assembly meeting to review
these minutes in a deliberate, unhurried manner;
b.
A lack of unifonnity due to the complete turnover of members of the committee
of commissioners each year and the resultant lack of experience;
c.
A lack of opportunities for questions or apparent problems to be resolved with
the presbytery(ies) in question before bringing a report to the floor of the
Assembly;
d.
The use of unnecessary time, energy, and printing space of the Assembly as a
whole to report and/or consider matters capable of proper resolution in
conference; and
e.
An inability to have the most efficient follow-up of those matters sent back to
presbyteries for their explanation, correction, or further action;
Therefore, the Presbytery of the Ascension respectfully overtures the Ninth General Assembly
of the Presbyterian Church in America to investigate the possibilities of referring the
review of presbytery records to an already-existing standing committee or subcommittee or of creating a new standing committee or sub-committee for this purpose.
1992, p. 262,20-71, IV, 1. (See KOREAN LANGUAGE PRESBYTERIES, above)
1993, p. 254,21-78, IV, 1. (See KOREAN LANGUAGE PRESBYTERIES, above)
1993, p. 256, 21-78, IV, 5. That General Assembly instruct stated clerks of presbyteries
that minutes of presbyteries relating to examinations must list all specific requirements and
trials for licensure and/or ordination which have been accomplished. This does not mean that a
separate vote on each item must be recorded.
Adopted
MISSION TO NORm AMERICA COMMI'ITEE

1973, p. 46, 1-66, 11. That the General Assembly officially ask each Presbytery to elect a
Committee on Mission to the United States with responsibilities commensurate with that name
and that each local session be asked to appoint a Committee on Mission to the United States.
1981, p. 87, 9-35, III, 13. That the actions A through H of the Presbytery MUS chairmen
be approved by the Assembly.
a.
GA M-US should provide standardized forms on which presbytery M-US works can be
periodically reported to GA M-US.
b.
Presbytery M-US Committee reports to presbytery should be shared with GA M-US.
c.
The GA M-US should videotape its organizing pastors' conferences and make the
videotapes available for use within the presbyteries.
d.
The following definition of a mission church should become standard: "A mission exists
when the goal of organizing a particular church is being pursued under the oversight and
support of either GA M-US, Presbytery M-US, a mother church or a combination of the
above. Where possible a church nearby should hold members on its roll as associate
members for the mission work until the day of the mission's organization. In remote areas
the presbytery is encouraged to place an evangelist on the scene as organizing pastor for
the purpose of receiving members."
e.
The 20-minute slide presentation on the 5 in 5 Campaign should be shown in all the
churches of the presbyteries by Presbytery M-US Committees.
f.
The television spots already made available by the GA M-US to churches in two areas
should be made available in as many other areas as possible. (The Assembly M-US
Committee notes that it will not distribute a spot containing a picture of Christ.)
g.
GA M-US organizing pastors should be itinerated among the churches. The Chairmen of
Presbytery M-US Committees would be responsible for arranging this itineration.

224

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
QUIT CLAIM DEED
h.

Each Presbytery M-US Committee should prepare a goals statement, have it approved by
the presbytery at its next meeting, and then send it to GA M-US for consolidation and
report to the General Assembly. (GA M-US would prepare a goals statement for areas
outside presbytery boundaries, and the consolidated report would constitute a master plan
for the church.)

MODERATOR

(See PART II: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCO 10-3, 1984, 12-53,
#51; PART m: JUDICIAL CASES, #33)
VISIT CHURCHES

(See PART II: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCO 13-9, 1985, 13-45,
#65; PART m: JUDICIAL CASES, #48)
VOTING ON JUDICIAL CASE

(See PART m: JUDICIAL CASES, #8, #21)

PROPHECY
(See SPIRITUAL GIFTS; PART III: JUDICIAL ·CASES, #61; PART V: POSmON
PAPERS, Spiritual Gifts, pp. 543-551)

PSALM SINGING
(See CE&P, PSALM SINGING)

PULPIT DRESS
1975, p. 112, 3-89. Recommendation #9 - The Committee recommends that Item 4 be
answered as follows:
To item 4 asking for direction as to what constitutes proper pulpit dress for Reformed pastors,
the Assembly makes the following response: There is no description in the New Testament of
suitable dress for the pulpit, and thus the Church has no warrant to legislate in this area. A
general principle can be stated which should govern the individual in his choice of dress for the
pulpit. To lead the congregation in worship and to minister the Word and Sacraments are the
highest sacred duties of the Minister. The dress of the Minister should be such that it does not
detract from the worship of God by calling attention to the man. Simple dignified dress suitable
to the cultural setting should be the rule to guide the Minister in his attire.
QUIT CLAIM DEED
(See also CHURCH, PROPERTY)
1976, p. 72,4-71, V. The request of Faith Presbyterian Church of Wauchula, Florida, for a
quit claim deed be answered by reference to the BCO 25-9, 26-10, and that the Directors of the
Corporation be authorized to grant a quit claim deed to any congregation of the Presbyterian
Church in America that requests it.
1977, p. 79, 5-79, 111,6. That the General Assembly endorse the action of the Committee
of Administration on quit claim deeds, and hereafter, it authorize the Moderator and the Stated
Clerk to sign such quit claim deeds;

225

PCADIGEST

RADIO AND TELEVISION
1981, p. 156,9-80, III, 17. That the Presbyterian Church in America, through the Christian
Education/Publications Committee, study ways, means, costs, and possible organizational
structure to utilize radio and television Wlder Presbyterian Church in America auspices, and be
it further recommended that the results of these actions be reported at the Tenth General
Assembly.
[Note: No subsequent actions were reported.]
1986. p. 116.14-43. III. 13. The Assembly is asked to approve the use of the Bible Study
Hour broadcast of Dr. James Boice and recommend that its Committee on Mission to North
America, presbyteries and churches sponsor the broadcast as a means of making the PCA
known, for the development of the church and of new congregations, and recommend that its
Committee on MNA, presbyteries, and churches consider sponsoring the broadcast.
Grounds:
1.
To specify the radio ministry of the Bible Study Hour.
That sponsorship be left up to the individual judicatories.
2.
MORAlS

1986, p. 187. 14-85.111.4. Overture 40, p. 45 from Philadelphia
It was moved and recommended that this overture on how to raise the moral standards of
television programs be answered by the adoption of the following statement:
"The 14th General Assembly of the PCA goes on record in stating that:
It deplores the continued disregard for the name of God and Scriptural values in the
1.
entertainment media, and that
We encourage our presbyteries, congregations, and members to become active in
2.
resisting such trends, and that
3.
The NFD Informer, published by the National Federation for Decency, be commended
to our congregations for resource materials and practical recommendations, and that.
4.
A copy of this recommendation be sent to the National Federation for Decency."

REPRFSENTATIVE ASSEMBLY
1975, p.' 79. 3-65, 19. That Overtures #2, #3, #9 (and a late Overture from Presbytery of
South Florida) all be answered as follows:
That representation to the 1976 General Assembly be on the basis as in past and that this
procedure be reviewed by the pennanent Committee on Administration during the year and that
it present a procedure for representation at future assemblies for consideration by the 1976
Assembly.
1976. p. 80, 4-74, III, B. The Committee recommends that there be no change of the
structure of future Assemblies Wltil the denomination's membership of churches exceeds 500.
1980, p. 121, 8-103, III, 3. That in view of the likelihood of surpassing 500 churches
during 1980, the question of a delegated Assembly be reopened by referring the matter to the
Committee on Administration for a report to the 1981 General Assembly.
1981, p. 155, 9-80, III, 7. That the issue of a Delegated Assembly be returned to the
Committee on Administration for further study, especially giving attention to a plan for
achieving greater parity of representation among teaching and ruling elders within the current
structure. It is further recommended that the Committee on Administration, in study, solicit
formal advice from each presbytery to consider in its deliberation.
1982, p. 69, 10-33, III, 14. That the Committee on Administration be authorized to
continue to study the matter of delegated Assemblies.
1983, p. 80, 11-30, III, 10. That the General Assembly approve the change to
representative assemblies. Defeated by a vote of 329 to 412.

226

ASSEMBLY ACI10NS
REVIEW OF LOWER COURT RECORDS
1987. p. 105. 15-38. 1. That the Committee's proposed amendment to BCO 14-2. providing
for a delegated assembly. be rejected. and if the life of the Ad Interim Committee is extended.
that the Committee be directed not to pursue the concept of a delegated assembly further.

REVIEW OF WWER COURT RECORDS
1982. p. 105. 10-75. III. 35. That the Committee on Administration be given the
assignment to study the problem of the review and cootrol of Presbyteries.
Grounds:
1.
Overture 18 to the Ninth General Assembly was answered in the affirmative but the
responsibility for carrying out the study was not given to a particular committee.
Therefore. both the Committee on Administration and the Sub-Committee on Judicial
Business have worked on the problem.
2.
The Sub-Committee on Judicial Business recognized that one of the solutions to the
problem was to assign the task to the Sub-Committee. Wanting to maintain the
integrity of the Sub-Committee. the members believed that it should not be involved in
a study that might result in greater responsibility for itself.
3.
Two separate proposed answers might cause confusioo. Only one committee should
study the problem and propose a solution.
1982. p. 125. 10-100. IV. 5. That the Committee on Administration consider the future
operations of the Committee of Commissioners on Review and Control of Presbyteries and
suggest a means to provide a mechanism for continuity in its operations from year to year.
1984. p. 208. 12-97. IV. 2. The Committee was gravely hindered in its work by two
factors. First, numerous presbyteries neglected to provide a representative to the Committee.
Second. even where men had been named. some who determined that they would be unable to
attend the Assembly failed to read and submit reports on minutes mailed to them. thereby
forcing the Committee to read the minutes at the Assembly. Recommendations that the General
Assembly express strong disapproval of both practices. and encourage both presbyteries and
designated representatives to fulfill their responsibilities to cooperate with the Committee.
1985. p. 109. 13-45. 111.48. That the advice regarding Constitutional Inquiry 6 be ratified.
(exceptions to Western Carolinas Minutes)
1985. p. 241. Appendix I. 6. Constitutiooallnquiry 6: From the Presbytery of the Western
Carolinas.
Regarding a disagreement with the action of the Twelfth General Assembly under
Review and Control of Presbyteries: "What we are asking for is advice as to how we may
present our 'case' in these matters of interpretation before a future General Assembly. Some. if
not all of you were present at that Friday aftemoon session in Baton Rouge; you can testify how
it went What opportunity was there to study the report. especially when we had no advance
notice of its contents. and to frame an argument against its adoption?
ANSWER:
The OB would point out that exceptions made by the Committee on Review and
Cootrol have been approved by the General Assembly. hence. are binding unless rescinded by
the General Assembly. Presbytery does have the privilege to appeal to the General Assembly to
rescind its previous action. giving appropriate justification.
This committee would further point out that every presbytery has a member on the
Committee on Review and Control of General Assembly that should be alert to concerns of his
own presbytery. Further, the Stated Clerk of presbytery himself should take the initiative to be
available to the Committee on Review and Control to respond to questions raised within
committee. Fmally. any member of presbytery. including the Stated Clerk. has a right to raise
questions in General Assembly when the report of Review and Control is made.

I
227

\

PCADIGEST
REVIEW OF LOWER COURT RECORDS
1985, p. 163, 13-76, III.
The Committee recommends that the General Assembly advise the presbyteries that the
following errors or omissions, which amount to exceptions, have appeared so generally
in the minutes throughout the denomination that to name them as exceptions to the
minutes of particular presbyteries would be unfair, but that they will be treated as
exceptions by the Review and Control Committee in the future:
a.
Inasmuch as both Teaching and Ruling Elders vow at ordination to be diligent
in the exercise of the duties of the offices to which they are called (}JeD 21-5
[7] and 24-5 [4]); and it is the responsibility of presbyteries to require their
members to be diligent, and to inquire into and censure delinquencies (}JeD 139 and 34-10); and the sessions within each presbytery are charged with
appointing diligent representatives to the higher court (}JeD 12-5); therefore,
presbyteries must take appropriate steps to deal with repetitive absences of
either individual Teaching Elders or Ruling Elder representatives of specific
churches.
The minutes of each presbytery submitted for review must include a copy of the
b.
Guidelines for Keeping Presbytery Minutes and a copy of the report received
from the Stated Clerk of the General Assembly concerning the minutes
reviewed by the Assembly (RAO 9-14-10).
2.
The Committee, having taken note of the exceptions found in the minutes submitted for
the past two years, recommends that the General Assembly advise the presbyteries that
the following are repetitive problem areas, to which particular attention should be paid
in order that proper procedures may be employed.
.
a.
The use of commissions, especially for ordinations;
b.
Examinations (all varieties);
c.
Establishment of quorulm and of the necessary number of votes where special
majorities (i.e. 2/3, 3/4, etc.) are required;
d.
Failure to attach documents mentioned in the minutes.
4.
The Committee was further hindered in two other ways. First, some men who were
appointed but determined that they could not attend the Assembly failed to submit
reports on minutes assigned to them, thereby forcing the Committee to read the minutes
during the Assembly. Second, some men named as Committee members were also
named as members of Committees of Commissioners, creating situations where the
men were supposed to be in two places at the same time. The Committee recommends
that the General Assembly express its strong disapproval of both practices, and
encourage both presbyteries and designated representatives to fulfill their
responsibilities to cooperate with the Committee.
1986, p. 210, 14-88, IV, B, 1. Recommend that a general reminder be made to all
Presbyteries of their obligation to record specific exceptions to Session minutes (}JeD 40-3).
1988, p. 164, 16-69, V, B, 5. That the General Assembly, on the advice of the Committee
on the Review and Control of Presbyteries, note in the minutes of that General Assembly the
presbyteries whose representatives have failed to perform the work assigned them; and
in order to assist the committee in completing the work at the Assembly, the new
moderator of the General Assembly, on the advice of the Committee on the Review and Control
of Presbyteries, shall appoint additional members, as needed, from the presbyteries whose
representatives have failed to finish their assignments.
Ground: The Committee on the Review and Control of Presbyteries is hindered severely by the
failure of some of its members to complete their reports and forward them to the chairman.

1.

228

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
RIDGE HAVEN

1988, p. 247,16-104, VI, 5. That the Assembly provide (through the Stated Clerk's Office)
services of computer operator and computer in, (a) entering reports of review of presbyteries
prior to assembly, and (b) meeting as presbyteries with the committee at the assembly to
provide continuous processing.
Grotmds: the enonnous amount of material which must be processed by this Committee.
1988, p. 247, 16-104, VI, 6. That the Assembly set the time for the convening of this
committee two full working days before the start of the Assembly.
1990, p. 190, 18-79, VII.
1.
That the Assembly provide (through the Stated aeck's Office) services of a computer
operator and computer in, (a) entering the reports of the review of presbyteries prior to
Assembly, and (b) meeting with the committee at the Assembly to provide continuous
processing.
2.
That the Assembly set the time for the convening of this committee to be in the morning
two full working days before the start of the Assembly.
3.
That the Assembly extend the term of committee members to three (3) years.
4.
That all members of the Committee on Review of Presbytery Records be reimbursed for
travel expenses; that members who are not delegates to GA be reimbursed for food and
lodging until the Committee reports to GA; and that delegates to GA be reimbursed for
food and lodging expenses incurred prior to the beginning of the Assembly.
1991, p. 125,19-61, III, 16, A. Presbytery Records Committee be reimbursed as necessary
for food and lodging for the two or three days prior to GA from GA registration fees. Further,
that members of Presbytery Records Committee, who are not commissioners, be reimbursed for
travel, food and lodging for only as long as they are needed to complete the work. (Note: This
policy to be reviewed after 3 years.)
Adopted
AU'nIORITY OF HIGHER COURTS

(See PART V: POSmON PAPERS, PCA Structure, pp. 516-541)

RIDGE HAVEN
BYLAWS

(See PART IV: BYLAWS, MANUALS AND GUIDELINES)
FOUNDING AND DEVEWPMENT

I

1977, p. 86,5-79.
That the General Assembly approve the general idea of establishing a Conference
Center when funds are available for that purpose.
17.
That the General Assembly authorize the expenditure of any funds designated for the
Conference Center that are not needed to consummate the purchase of the site for any
preliminary work that needs to be done in connection with the development of the
center.
18.
That the General Assembly appoint a pennanent Sub-Committee to work under the
Committee on Administration to be charged with the responsibility of acquiring a
suitable site and developing the Center, said Committee to consist of 11 men elected by
the Assembly, the Coordinators of the four Committees and the Stated Clerk to serve as
Advisory Members without vote.
19.
That the General Assembly authorize this Committee:
a.
To solicit and receive additional gifts designated for the Center.
b.
To purchase a site, either by paying cash for the site or by accepting terms
offered by the sellers.

I

229

15.

1

i

PCADIGEST
RIDGE HAVEN
c.

d.
e.
f.

To expend funds given for the development of the Center, limiting its spending
to funds actually in hand. The Committee is not authorized to borrow money
without the express approval of the General Assembly, except as in "b".
To develop land not needed for the Center itself and to sell lots to members of
PCA and others.
To bring to the 1978 General Assembly a long range plan for the development
and financing of the Center.
That other sites across the nation be considered by the Committee, to insure that
the best interests of the PCA in other parts of the country, and also allows the
Committee to receive a gift of a site in other than the Southeast.

1978, p. 70, 6-34, III.
6.

That the Assembly authorize the Sub-Committee to hire staff members for the
Conference Center as and when it deems necessary.
7.
That the Assembly approve a Board of Trustees of the Conference Center in accord
with the following Plan:
That the General Assembly establish a Board of Trustees for the Conference
Center in place of the present Conference Center Sub-Committee.
That this Board be empowered to incorporate the Center in the state of North
Carolina and according to its laws pertaining to non-profit religious
organizations.
That the initial Board consist of nine (9) members in three (3) classes as
follows ...
That the Nominating Committee submit names for each new class beginning in
1981 for the Class of 1984.
That the Board of Trustees prepare and submit bylaws and policy
recommendations for consideration and approval by the 1979 General
Assembly.
9.
That the Assembly receive this report as a progress report and authorize the SubCommittee to continue:
a.
To solicit and receive additional gifts designated for the Center.
To expend funds given for the development of the Center, limiting its spending
b.
to funds actually in hand.
To bring to the 1979 General Assembly a long range plan for the development
c.
and financing of the Center.
To consider other sites across the nation, to insure that the best interests of the
d.
PCA are served. This is with a view toward the future development of the PCA
in other parts of the country and also allows the Sub-Committee to receive a
gift of a site in other than the southeast.
1990, p. 96, 18-33, III, 4. That North Carolina Ridge Haven continue its authorized
development and encouragement be given to the development of other Ridge Havens, all to be
under the authority of the Ridge Haven Board elected by General Assembly.
FUNDING

1978. p. 70. 6-34. III. 8. That in order to protect the Conference Center project against
financial crises resulting from uncertain and fluctuating cash flow, the Sub-Committee is to
retain, from this point, an account of $100,000.00 to cover the first three (3) years of interest
payments as well as the fourth year's principal and interest payment. Thereafter, the account
will be maintained at a level sufficient to make at least one year's combined payment.

230

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
RIDGE HAYEN
1979, p. 121, 7-58, IV, 8. That the following recommendations regarding reserve account
be approved:
Whereas, The Conference Center Committee reported to the Sixth General Assembly that a
reserve account of $85,000 would be set up to cover the first three annual payments on
the mortgage on the property and the fourth year's interest and principal payments, and
this was apPr:oved by the Assembly, and
Whereas, with increasing inflation, costs of every kind are escalating more rapidly than the
interest that could be earned on funds held in reserve, and the purchasing power of the
money today will probably be much greater than it will be three years from now, and
Whereas, the adoption of this recommendation will enable Ridge Haven to use approximately
$68,000 to build roads and construct facilities this year, and in the Board's opinion be
better stewardship of the Lord's money, The Board of Directors of Ridge Haven, Inc.,
recommends that only a sum sufficient to cover the next year's payment be held in
reserve.
1981, p. 95, 9-38, III, 8. That sessions and churches be encouraged to include Ridge Haven
Conference Center in their annual budgets.
1981, p. 93, 9-38, III, 3. That the following resolution be adopted:
Whereas, RIDGE HAYEN, INC., is engaged in the construction of a conference center for the
Presbyterian Church in the Blue Ridge MO\mtains of Transylvania County in North
Carolina; and
Whereas, the said RIDGE HAYEN, INC., is in immediate need of funds to proceed with the
construction of additional elements of said conference center in accordance with the
Master Plan for the conference center; and
Whereas, The Keyes Company of Miami has executed and delivered to the Presbyterian Church
in America its promissory note in the original principal sum of $806,079.14, dated the
11th day of January, 1980, and payable in annual installments of $161,215.83, as a
donation and has stipulated that it should be assigned to RIDGE HAYEN, INC., to be
used by it to assist in the construction of the conference center in Transylvania County,
and the Presbyterian Church in America is now in the process of assigning said note to
RIDGE HAYEN, INC., as directed by the donor; and
Whereas, it appears that the only feasible way to obtain the funds needed by RIDGE HAYEN,
INC., in the near future is through a term loan; and
Whereas, RIDGE HAYEN, INC., has secured from Aagship National Bank of Miami a
commitment for a term loan of $400,000 upon the following terms and conditions:
1.
The loan shall be a four-year term loan and evidenced by a promissory note of
RIDGE HAYEN, INC. Draws may be made in amounts as required by the
borrower up to a total of $400,000 until January 11, 1982, at which time the
loan shall begin to amortize in $100,000 increments on a yearly basis.
2.
The interest rate shall be the Prime Rate of Aagship National Bank of Miami
plus one-fourth (1/4) of one per cent (1%). The rate shall be adjusted quarterly
and the interest payable quarterly. RIDGE HAVEN, INC., will be required to
open an account at Flagship National Bank of Miami and authorize the
automatic deduction of interest therefrom.
3.
The Keyes Company note payable to the Presbyterian Church in America in the
original principal sum of $806,079.14 shall be assigned to RIDGE HAYEN,
INC., and further assigned by it to Flagship National Bank of Miami. In
addition, certain additional collateral which the Keyes Realty Companies of
Miami have agreed to pledge as security to the note of RIDGE HAVEN, INC.,
shall be delivered to the lender.
4.
Yearly financial statements prepared by RIDGE HAYEN's auditor as provided
for in Article IX, Paragraph 3, of its Bylaws shall be furnished to Aagship
National Bank of Miami.

231

PCADIGEST
RIDGE HAVEN
5.

Copy of resolution of the Ninth General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church
in America authorizing RIDGE HAVEN, INC., to incur the indebtedness to
Flagship National Bank of Miami on the foregoing terms and the securing of
said loan by the reassignment of The Keyes Company note hereinabove
referred to, to be furnished said bank; and
Whereas, the directors of RIDGE HAVEN, INC., have approved the making of said loan by
proper resolution and have authorized the execution and delivery of the promissory note
and other documents necessary to obtain and secure said loan, subject to the approval of
the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America; and
Whereas, this Ninth General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America desires to
approve the proposed loan set out above and to authorize the assignment of The Keyes
Company note hereinabove referred to;
Now, Therefore, Be It Resolved by the Ninth General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in
America as follows:
1.
That the note of The Keyes Company to Presbyterian Church in America in the
original sum of $806,079.14, dated the 11th day of January, 1980, and payable
in five (5) equal, annual installments be assigned to RIDGE HAVEN, INC., in
accordance with the stipulation of the maker of said note to be used by it in the
construction of the conference center in Transylvania County, North Carolina,
and the proper officers of the Presbyterian Church in America are hereby
authorized and directed to make such assignment.
2.
That RIDGE HAVEN, INC., is hereby authorized to obtain a term loan of
$400,000 from Flagship National Bank of Miami on the following terms and
conditions:
a.
The loan shall be a four-year term loan and evidenced by a promissory
note of RIDGE HAVEN, INC. Draws may be made in amounts as
required by RIDGE HAVEN, INC., up to a total of $400,000 until
January 11, 1982, at which time the loan shall begin to amortize in
$100,000 increments on a yearly basis.
b.
The interest rate shall be the Prime Rate of Flagship National Bank of
Miami, plus one-fourth (1/4) of one percent (1%). The rate shall be
adjusted quarterly and the interest payable quarterly. RIDGE HAVEN,
INC., is authorized to open an account at Flagship National Bank of
Miami and authorize the automatic deduction of interest from said
account.
c.
RIDGE HAVEN, INC., is authorized to reassign The Keyes Company
note referred in Paragraph 1. above to Flagship National Bank of Miami
as collateral to its promissory note referred to in Paragraph 1. above. In
addition, certain additional collateral which The Keyes Realty
Companies of Miami have agreed to pledge as security to the note of
RIDGE HAVEN, INC., shall be delivered to the lender upon such
terms as may be agreed upon between said Companies and the lender.
d.
RIDGE HAVEN, INC., is authorized to deliver yearly financial
statements prepared by its auditor as provided for in Article IX,
Paragraph 3, of its Bylaws to Flagship National Bank of Miami, so long
as it may be indebted to said bank on the note hereinabove referred to.
e.
That a copy of this resolution be certified by the Stated Clerk and
delivered to RIDGE HAVEN, INC., for delivery to Flagship National
Bank of Miami in accordance with its requirements for making the
proposed loan to RIDGE HAVEN, INC.

232

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
RIDGE HAVEN
STATE OF NORTH CAROLINA
COUNTY OF TRANSYLVANIA
I. MORTON H. SMITH. Stated Clerk of the Presbyterian Church in America. do
hereby certify that the foregoing and attached is a true and exact copy of a Resolution adopted
by the Ninth General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America in a regular session on
June 16th. 1981. at which a quorum was present and a majority thereof voted for said
Resolution. and that the same has not been altered. amended or rescinded. and is still in full
force and effect.
This the 16th day of June. 1981.
Stated Clerk.
Presbyterian Church in America
1989, p. 131, 17-80, III, 4. That Ridge Haven be allowed to conduct a capital funds
campaign during 1992-93.
INCORPORATION

(See PART IV: BYLAWS. MANUALS AND GUIDELINES)
LEASING LOTS

1979, p. 121,7-58, IV, 5. That the following recommendation regarding leasing of lots be
approved;
Whereas. when the Fifth General Assembly authorized the Conference Center Committee to
proceed with the purchase of a site. it was understood that the Committee planned to
raise part of the funds needed for the development of the Center by the sale of lots to
PeA members and others. and
Whereas. discussion on the floor of the Sixth General Assembly indicated that some
commissioners felt that the Church should not become involved in the development of
the Center by the sale of lots to PCA members and others. and
Whereas. interest already shown indicates that many PeA members would like to acquire sites
adjacent to the Center. and the reason for purchasing 710 acres instead of only 200 was
to develop such lots. and such lots will be in easy walking distance to the Center and
will provide a significant increase in housing capacity without cost to the Center. and
Whereas. the development of the Center will increase the desirability of adjoining properties.
the Board feels that the Center should benefit financially from the lease or sale of lots
rather than allow this financial benefit to accrue to independent investors. and
Whereas. the fonner authority regarding lots was not rescinded. the board believes it has the
authority to develop and lease or sell lots. but to eliminate all doubt,
The Board recommends that the Seventh General Assembly specifically authorize the Board of
Directors of Ridge Haven. Inc .• to develop and lease lots on the Conference Center property.
Explanation: The Church is not in the real estate business. The provision of lots is for the
benefit of the Conference Center, which benefit is best preserved by the greater control which
leasing allows.
MASTERPLAN

(See PART IV: BYLAWS. MANUALS AND GUIDELINES)
NAME

1978, p. 70, 6-34, III, 4. That the Assembly approve the name "Ridge Haven" for the
official title of the Conference Center site.

\
I

233

PCADIGEST
RIDGE HAVEN
PARTICIPATION ENCOURAGED

1981, p. 95,9-38, III.
That sessions and churches be encouraged to have a Ridge Haven representative present
the Conference Center to their congregations.
7.
That churches, presbyteries, and General Assembly Committees be encouraged to use
the facilities of Ridge Haven for retreats, conferences, and other meetings whenever
possible.
9.
That all Committees of the General Assembly be encouraged to use the facilities at
Ridge Haven.

6.

RESTRICTIVE AND PROTECTIVE COVENANTS

1979, p. 121, 7·58, IV, 7. That the Board of Directors of Ridge Haven, Inc., be authorized
to prepare a declaration of restrictive and protective covenants for Ridge Haven, Inc., in
conformity with state and local laws.
USE

1979, p. 121, 7·58, IV, 9. That the following policy concerning the use of the Center be
approved:
It shall be the policy of Ridge Haven, Inc., to give primary consideration for use of grounds and
facilities to PCA groups and members and other evangelical Christians.

ROTATION OF ELDERS
(See PART II: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCD 3-1, 1986, 14-52,
16,2; BCD 24-1,1986,14-52,17; PART III: JUDICIAL CASES, #8)

SABBATH
(See also INTERCHURCH RELATIONS, LORD'S DAY AlLIANCE; PART m: JUDICIAL
CASES, #23, #28, #37)
1976, p. 65, 4·57, 3, b. Overture 5 with amendment as follows:
Whereas, the Word of God clearly instructs men to observe the Sabbath day, to keep it holy and
to set aside this one day out of seven as being consecrated to the Lord: (Genesis 21:1-3;
Exodus 20:8-11; Isaiah 58: 1 3 - 1 4 ) · '
And Whereas, the Sabbath day has fallen into widespread profanation and disuse in American
society today, and various athletic, commercial, and social enterprises and activities
have all but obliterated our former national reverence for this holy day.
Therefore, we the members of the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America
reaffirm our unwavering stand against all unnecessary encroachments upon the Lord's
Day, and exhort all citizens everywhere to worship God and to properly set aside and
• sanctify the Sabbath of the Lord Jesus Christ. And that we exhort each pastor and
session to study the positive application of Sabbath observance to their congregation in
order to bring our practice into greater conformity with the Church's Standards.
1981, p. 149.,9-71, III, 3.
Whereas, a bill has been prefiled in the Congress of the United States of America to change the
day of national elections from Tuesday to Sunday, and
Whereas, the Lord of the Sabbath has instructed his people to, "Give unto Caesar that which is
Caesar's and unto God that which is God's.",
Be it therefore resolved that the Ninth General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in
America, on clear Scriptural principles. opposes this proposed usurpation of God's
prerogatives by the civil magistrate.

234

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
SESSION
Grounds:
1.
BCO 11:2.1; 14:6.
2.
WCFChapter 21, paragraph 7.
3.
A change in national electioo day to Sunday would force many PCA members
to violate their consciences in matters of obedience to God's Word.
By motion duly seconded, the Stated Clerk was directed to send a copy of this Resolution to the
President and to the Congress of the United States of America.

SALARY FOR COORDINATORS
(See COMPENSATION FOR COORDINATORS)
SECRET SOCIETIES
(See FREEMASONRY; PART V: POSmON PAPERS, Freemasonry, pp. 3OO-377)
SEMINARY
(See CE&P, TIlEOLOGICAL SEMINARIES)
SESSION
BUDGETS

(See PART IT: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCO 1O-2)
MANUALS

1975. p. 74. 3-55. Moved that the Judicial Business Committee be asked: (1) to give a
decision as to whether or not the Session of the Church can leg~y devise additional rules
supplemental to those set forth in our Book of Church Order concerning the procedures
governing the electioo of officers in the local church; (2) to decide the legality of local churches
Operational manuals and/or Sessions' books of church order for local Churches which are in
conformity with, but supplemental to the denomination's Book of Church Order.
1975. p. 113. 3-89. In response to the Resolution of John Holmes (See paragraph 3-55)
regarding additional rules and operational manuals for sessions and congregations, the
Committee recommends it be answered as follows: Since no case is before us, no ruling can be
made, but it is the opinion of the Assembly that such manuals are in order, as long as there is no
conflict with the Constitution.
MINUTES

(See PART IT: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCO 13-9, 1986, 14-52,

46)
MODERATOR

Stated Supply
(See PART IT: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCO 12-3, 1987, 15-83,

m,l1)
Voting Rights
(See PART II: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCO 4-3,1985,13-45,
49,52;1986,14-52,45)

\
\

235

PCADIGEST
SESSION

QUORUM
(See PART II: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCO 12-1, 1984, 12-53,

62)
RECEIVING AND TRANSFERRING MEMBERS

1993, p. 118,21-56, III, 2. "Request Prompt Notification when Transferring Members"
...in the matter of receiving and transferring members, that member congregations of the
Presbyterian Church in America be exhorted,
1.
that the Session of a receiving congregation notify the former congregation, if that
congregation be evangelical, and request release of members desiring to transfer when
appropriate, and,
2.
that the Session of a fonner congregation promptly transfer members in good standing
when asked to do so, and,
3.
that when a member whose transfer is requested is not in good standing in the fonner
congregation, the Session of that congregation should so infonn the requesting Session
and may explain why the member is not in good standing, and,
4.
where problems of discipline or known unrepented sin exist with persons desiring to
transfer, the Sessions of both congregations shoold work together to bring about
restoration of the individual and purity of the body.
5.
Caution should be exercised in sending records of judicial proceedings without the
consent of the parties.
STATED SUPPLY

(See PART II: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCO 12-3, 1987, 15-83,
m,ll)
VOTING RIGHI'S

(See PART II: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, BCO 4-3,1985,13-45,
49,52; 1986,14-52,45)

SOCIAL SECURITY
(See IAR, SOCIAL SECURITY PROGRAM)

SPIRITUAL GIFTS
(See also PART ill: JUDICIAL CASES, #61; PART V: POSmON PAPERS, Spiritual
Gifts, pp. 543-551)
1973,1-50. Report of Special Committee on Setting up Charismatic Gift Committee
1.
That the special committee to study the charismatic gifts be appointed by the
Moderator, the Stated Clerk, and the Chainnan of the Constitutional Documents
Committee, and
2.
That this committee be composed of seven elders-four teaching elders and three ruling
elders-and that it be representative of the spectrum of convictions on this matter in the
National Presbyterian Church.
3.
That it be charged as follows:
a.
To recommend to the 1974 General Assembly wording for BCO 7-1 that is
faithful to the principles of the Refonned Faith while not expressing views
representing just one segment of Reformed Christians; and

236

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
STANDING JUDICIAL COMMISSION
b.

c.

To study thoroughly questions regarding spiritual gifts, such as: the extent to
which any must certainly have permanently ceased, the possibility that any may
perhaps exist today and, if so, the nature of such gifts as they may be practiced
today. Such study should include the Bible, the writings of different Reformed
theologians through history, and the views of members of the National
Presbyterian Church; and
To recommend to the 1974 General Assembly guidelines indicating at what
points we ought to be agreed and at what points liberty to hold differing
viewpoints should exist among us.

STANDING JUDICIAL COMMISSION
1987, p. 106, 15-43. Ad Interim Committee on the General Assembly - Judicial
Procedures....Recommendation 2 of the Majority Report was adopted as follows:
2.
That the General Assembly approve and send to the Presbyteries for action the
proposed amendment to the Book of Church Order Chapter 15 as set out in Exhibit "B"
to this report.
1987, p. 477, Appendix S. JUDICIAL BUSINESS PROCEDURE
Your Committee submits Exhibit "B" attached as the recommendation of the entire
Committee, with the exception of one matter therein on which 2 members submit a minority
report. This minority report deals with the issue of whether or not a court should "debate" the
judgment of its Commission which tried the case or just accept or reject the judgment "without
debate". Otherwise all the Ad Interim Committee members concur in this recommendation.
In the 14th General Assembly, Rev. Don Clements proposed that the idea of regional
panels be incorporated in the Rules of Assembly Operations rather than in the Book of Church
Order. This suggestion was made so that the procedure could be more easily modified as
experience mandated. There were not enough commissioners on the floor to meet requirements
of the RAO and thus amend the rules. But there seemed to be overwhelming support for the
idea. Your Committee has incorporated this change in its recommendation.
At the presbytery level, this proposal would allow the presbytery the option of trying a
judicial case as a whole or submitting it to a commission. The Committee felt that presbytery
was small enough to be able to try the case as a whole, if it so desired. But if the presbytery
elected to assign the case to a commission, which would hear all the witnesses and try the case,
then the presbytery should approve or disapprove the commission's judgment without debate.
Why have a commission if the presbytery wants to debate the case? The presbytery does have
the right to disapprove the commission's judgment and try the case itself or refer it to another
commission. If the presbytery thinks that the commission's judgment raises a constitutional
issue, it may refer the constitutional issue to a study committee to report so that the members
might be enlightened on the coostitutional matter. This Study Committee report would be for
information only and not binding on the Court. But to allow the presbytery to debate the case
when it did not hear the witnesses. have all the facts and exhibits. nor hear the arguments of the
parties. would be very frustrating to presbytery members who would be asked to make a
judgment on the subjective arguments of presbyters without hearing the case. Such a debate
would open the presbytery to the persuasive arguments of eloquent presbyters rather than
having the protection of the checks and balances in the Rules of Discipline.
At the General Assembly level, the Committee's recommendations would require the
commitment of every judicial case to the Standing Judicial Commission. The Standing Judicial
Commission would consist of 24 members elected in the same manner as all General Assembly
Committees, except no person could be elected if there already is a member from the same
presbytery.

237

PCADIGEST
STANDING JUDICIAL COMMISSION
In an effort to get as much infonnation on each case to the Commissioners at General
Assembly, the Standing Judicial Commission shall submit a report of each case which contains:
1.
A summary of the facts.
2.
A statement of the issues.
3.
Any written briefs of the parties.
Any recommended judgment of a judicial panel.
4.
The reasoning of the Commission.
5.
6.
Its recommended judgment.
This report must be mailed to the Clerk of Session of each church at least 30 days prior to the
meeting of General Assembly at which it is considered. Thus the Commissioners will have
ample opportunity to study the report before coming to General Assembly.
The General Assembly would then approve or disapprove the judgment without
question or debate or discussion. Again, if debate is pennitted, the Commissioners will be
asked to make a decision without hearing the witnesses or the arguments of the parties. This
would be frustrating and could open the case to persuasive arguments of eloquent
commissioners who have a particular interest in the case. Your Committee's recommendation
does provide that if the General Assembly feels that a sufficient constitutional issue is raised by
a case, the General Assembly may submit that constitutional issue to a study committee for
report and hold its decision until such a study is reported. This Study Committee report would
be for information only and not binding on the court. The majority of your Ad Interim
Committee believes that the full report, above mentioned, of the Standing Judicial Commission
will give commissioners sufficient information to allow them to vote, without debate, to either
approve or disapprove the judgment. If the General Assembly disapproves the judgment, it may
resubmit the case to the Standing Judicial commission, appoint another commission to try the
case, or in an extremely critical matter try the case in the General Assembly as a whole.
Your Committee's recommendation provides for RAO changes (if the BCO changes are
approved) which would permit the Standing Judicial Commission to appoint a panel of not less
than three of its members to hear the case. Such a panel shall be chosen from its members who
are geographically nearest to the locus of the case. Such a panel shall propose to the Standing
Judicial Commission a recommended decision. We believe this will enable a panel to hear the
case quickly when it arises and while all the facts are fresh on the minds of the witnesses. We
believe it will work for quicker and fairer judgment.
As a protection to the parties and the Church, any proposed decision of a panel shall be
circulated to the entire 24 members of the Standing Judicial Commission. Any party to the case
or any commission member may request a review of the case as a whole. Such a review must
be granted if requested by a dissenting member of the panel which heard the case or by at least
four members of the commission.
Finally, your Ad Interim Committee unanimously recommends that we return the
Judicial Business Committee to its original function of providing non-binding advice on
constitutional matters. it would be re-named to "Committee on Constitutional Business". Since
its advice would be non-binding, it would not need to report to a Committee of Commissioners
nor to General Assembly, except when so requested. This would eliminate the time consuming
reports to General Assembly. If the party receiving this non-binding advice is not satisfied,
your Committee believes the proper procedure to get a binding opinion is through the courts of
the church by overture, judicial case, or other pennissible procedures.
Your Committee believes the procedures outlined in Exhibit "B" will give quick and
just answers to all parties interested in a judicial case or complaint and provides adequate
safeguards that the ultimate decision must be made by a court of the Church.

238

ASSEMBLY ACI10NS
STEWARDSIllP
STATED CLERK
GENERAL ASSEMBLY

1973, p. 52, 1-72,5. The Convention in Asheville defined the duties of the Stated Oerk for
the General Assembly but did not make him answerable to anybody except the General
Assembly. Since the General Assembly meets only annually it is our recommendation that the
Stated Clerk be made answerable to the Committee on Administration of the General Assembly
in the same fashion as the Business Administrator.
1974, p. 82, 2-106, IV,4. That the Committee on Administration be empowered to hire a
provisional Stated Oerk if the need should arise between assemblies.
1975, p. 91, 3-81, 22. That the General Assembly encourage each local session to compile
and maintain a history of the church and that the Stated Clerk of the General Assembly be
directed to supervise the collection and depOsition of such material at the direction of the
Assembly.
1988, p. 139, 16-58, 3. That the Stated Clerk elected by this 16th General Assembly serve
as Coordinator of COA until the 17th General Assembly and that he have authority to appoint a
business manager/treasurer with the approval of COA.
1988, p. 249, 16-104, VI, 13. That the General Assembly direct the Stated Clerk of the
General Assembly to hold regional workshops for presbytery Stated Clerks during the year.
PRFSBYTERY

1974, p. 83, 2-106, IV, 13. That the General Assembly direct the Stated Clerks of
Presbyteries to report all changes in their rolls to the Stated Oerk of the General Assembly
within one week after such changes have been made.
1978, p. 123, 6-116, III, D. That the Stated Oerks of Presbyteries or an appointed
representative meet annually at the General Assembly with the Stated Clerk of the General
Assembly at his discretion for the purpose of instruction pertaining to any matters deemed
necessary.
STATISTICS
1983, p. 80, 11-30, III, 12. That the General Assembly request each PCA church to
participate in the completion of a congregational profile questionnaire and census form entitled
"Session's Annual Survey and Statistical Report for the Office the General Assembly, PCA."

STEWARDSHIP
(See also GENERAL ASSEMBLY, FINANCIAL POUCIES)
PARTICIPATION ENCOURAGED

1975, p. 122, 3-93, III, A, 8. That the CM1W be encouraged to continue the development
of materials and methods that will encourage churches in faithful stewardship that will lead to
obedience to the Great Commission. Further. that individuals, Sessions and Presbyteries be
encouraged to contribute to the development of materials and methods for financing world
evangelization.
1978, p. 124, 6-117, II, 7. That presbyteries encourage each church to participate in the
stewardship seminars when they are offered in their area.
1981, p. 120, 9-61, III.
3.
That presbyteries encourage the session of each local church to appoint a Stewardship
Key-Man.
4.
That presbyteries encourage each church to participate in a Stewardship Seminar when
it is offered in its area

239

PCADIGEST
STEWARDSHIP

5.

That each church be encouraged to use the 1981 Stewardship Materials, "Giving
Yourself First. "
6.
That churches and presbyteries be urged to complete the report on the 1982 Assembly
Asldngs promptly upon request of the Sub-committee on Stewardship Ministries.
7.
That the paper entitled "Theology of Stewardship" be received for information and that
presbyteries and sessions be encouraged to study it as a guideline for stewardship
planning.
'
1983. p. 104. 11-43.111.8. That all churches review carefully their giving to PCA causes in
comparison with their giving to non-PCA Benevolences, and that all churches be encouraged to
increase their support of PeA needs.
SEASON FOR COMMITMENT

1974. p. 81.4-75. II. B. 7. That the General Assembly designate for future years as special
Stewardship Season for Commitment with the last Sunday in said season being designated as
"Commitment Sunday."
STEWARDSHIP RESPONSIBIUTIFS

1974. p. 83. 2-106. IV. 20. That the responsibility for preparing and distributing
stewardship materials for use in the local churches be placed in the hands of the Committee of
Christian Education and Publications.
1983. p. 108. 11-43.32. Attachment ~ III. A. That all present functions and personnel of
the PSCSM be assigned to the Committee on Administration.
1988. p. 210. 16-91. III. 29. That CF./P undertake the Stewardship and Week of Prayer
responsibilities for 1989.
1992. p. 83. 20-36. III. 10. That the 20th General Assembly assist CE&P in encouraging
and recommending the stewardship program and materials developed and coordinated by CE&P
in order to promote the one work of the church concept {Book of Church Order 14:1-13}.

Adopted
TITHING

1978. p. 124. 6-117, II, 4. That the General Assembly exhort the pastors and sessions of
the Presbyterian Church in America to practice, preach, and teach tithing in each of the PCA
congregations; and that the Sub-Committee for Stewardship Ministries be instructed to convey
this exhortation to the sessions and pastors of the PeA when it reports on the 1979 budget and
interpret it to the congregations.

STEWARDSHIP COMMITTEE (PSCSM)
(See also PCA FOUNDATION, F1JNDING; PART V: POSmON PAPERS, PCA Structure,
pp. 516-541)
ADVISORY MEMBERSHIP

1979. p. 76. 7-22. The Special Advisory Committee to the Committee on Stewardship
Ministries, in compliance with the mandate of the Sixth General Assembly relating to
development of systematic budgeting and funding procedures, makes the following
recommendations:
Recommendations:
1.
That the Bylaws be amended by adding Section 10 to Article IV as follows:
Section to. The Committee.on Stewardship Ministries

240

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
STEWARDSHIP COMMrITEE
This Committee shall operate administratively as a Sub-Committee of the Committee
on Administration. The Committee will make direct report to each Assembly. This SubCommittee shall be considered as a Permanent Sub-Committee as to continuity; but it shall not
be considered as a Penn anent Sub-Committee under Book of Church Order, Section 15-1-12, as
it relates to nominations and service. This Committee shall consist of one Ruling Elder and one
Teaching Elder from the active or alternate members of each of the following four pennanent
committees, to wit: Mission to the World, Mission to the Unites States, Administration, and
Christian Education and Publications. These committee members shall be assigned by each of
the four pennanent committees, above named, and shall serve at the pleasure of such pennanent
committee. The Coordinators of said four permanent committees and the Director of
Stewardship Ministries shall be advisory members of this Committee.
1981, p. 115,9-56, III, 8, a. That the advisory membership of the Stewardship Committee
be enlarged to include the Managing Director of the J>CA Foundation, the Moderator and the
Stated Clerk of the General Assembly; and that the Chainnan of the Committee be elected
annually from among its voting members. This requires a change in the Bylaws, Article IV, 10,
next to the last line, following the words "four permanent committees" to read "the Director of
the Stewardship Committee, the Managing Director of the PCA Foundation, the Moderator and
the Stated aerk of the General Assembly shall be adVisory members of this Committee."
BUDGET

1978, p. 98, 6-87, III, S. That the Stewardship Sub-Committee receive a percentage of their
approved budget equal to the percentage of each Pennanent Committee's budget received in the
year beginning with the year 1979.
DIRECI'ORS

1981, p. 116, 9-56, III, 9. That the PCA Foundation and the Stewardship Committee
eventually shall have separate full-time directors. Each organization will be responsible to
prepare a job description and qualifications for its own Director which shall be approved by the
General Assembly. Each organization will nominate its own Director for Assembly's approval.
The salary of the Directors shall not exceed that of the Coordinators of the permanent
committees.
1982, p. 115, 10-90, III, 12. That the following job description for the Director of
Stewardship Ministries be approved as amended.
JOB DESCRIPTION FOR DIRECTOR OF STEWARDSHIP
The responsibilities of the Director of Stewardship must reflect the assignment of the
Stewardship Committee. That assignment includes three major functions:
I.
Goals and Guidelines
IT.
Budget Review
ITI.
Coordination of the Promotional Work of the Program Committees
I.
GOALS AND GUIDELINES
The Director of Stewardship will:
a.
Receive from each committee its proposed short and long range goals and their
estimate of the costs for the coming year.
b.
Present these goals to the Stewardship Committee at its January meeting each
year.
c.
Correlate these committee reports according to a unifonn fonnat for the
Stewardship Committee, so it will be able to make comparisons easily.
d.
Prepare guidelines for local congregations expressing the Stewardship
Committee's recommendations concerning goals and their priorities. These
guidelines will be part of the Stewardship Committee's report to General
Assembly (and subsequently distributed to the congregations).

\

1
1

241

PCADIGEST
STEWARDSHIP COMMITIEE
Prepare the fonnal report for General Assembly based on the Committee's
decisions. The report will be approved by the Committee together with
recommendations for General Assembly deliberation and decisioo.
f.
Develop and promote a system of "wings" for the General Assembly budget
from local congregatioos.
BUDGET REVIEW
The Director of Stewardship will:
a.
Gather budget proposals from all organizations.
Prepare whatever statistical information is needed and gather necessary data to
b.
assist the Stewardship Committee to review, evaluate, and recommend an
overall budget to the General Assembly. This review is to be finalized at the
March meeting of the Stewardship Committee.
c.
Encourage the use of a uniform budget by all committees to be introduced at
the January meeting of the Stewardship Committee.
d.
Prepare and distribute to all local congregations statistical infonnation that will
keep them abreast of the financial condition of the four pennanent committees.
COORDINATION OF THE PROMOTIONAL WORK OF THE PROGRAM
COMMfITEES
The Director of Stewardship will:
a.
Report to and be responsible to the Stewardship Committee.
b.
Establish an office and staff within income limits at the same location used by
the pennanent coounittees of General Assembly.
Work with the four permanent committees and the coordinators to reflect their
c.
concerns to the people of our denomination. This will involve his attendance at
all meetings of the pennanent committees of the denomination.
d.
Meet with the four coordinators at least quarterly, and act as chainnan of that
meeting.
e.
Receive promotional information from all committees including publications,
conferences or seminars, itineration schedules, meetings with Presbyteries,
Sessions, etc.
f.
Distribute this information via computer print-outs to all committees as an aid
in their promotional planning.
e.

ll.

m.

IV.

GENERAL DUTIES:
The Director of Stewardship will:
a.
Oversee a program to develop stewardship within all the Presbyteries that will
involve each Session in the PeA to stimulate the giving of tithes and offerings.
b.
Set up and regulate a Stewardship Speakers Bureau.
c.
Endeavor to visit each Presbytery at least ooce every three years.
d.
Provide general oversight to the Director of the PCA Foundation and to
promote its work wherever ~ible.
e.
Supervise the Stewardship staff personnel and assist them wherever needed.
f.
Oversee the development of a presbytery and congregational stewardship
network of "key men. "
g.
Set up a system to educate incoming churches regarding PCA budgeting
proposals and stewardship.

242

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
STEWARDSHIP COMMlTIEE
DUTIES

1979, p. 76, 7-22, 1. This Committee shall promote Biblical Stewardship at all levels of the
church; and it shall be charged with the responsibility of developing foe, recommending to, and
implementing foe the General Assembly systematic budgeting and funding pucedures foe all
the General Assembly approved causes. It is recognized that it would be unwise to ask this
Committee to undertake all these responsibilities at once. This Committee would assume these
specific responsibilities as it is willing and able to accept the responsibility foe funding them.
Until this Committee assumes a specific responsibility, the four Pennanent Committees will
continue their responsibility in this specific area in the manner assigned by previous General
Assemblies.
Such budgeting and funding procedures shall be governed by the following rules:
(1)
Committee budgets shall be divided into a "committed" and a "growth" budget.
"Committed" shall include all administrative and program commitments approved by
the General Assembly foe this committee. "Growth shall include those programs
projected by the committee, approved by the General Assembly, and which allow foe
the unusual demands and opportunities which cannot be accurately envisioned during
the budgeting process. Funding foe such "growth" budget shall be the responsibility of
the pennanent committee which proposes the same.
(2)
It is to be understood that the "growth" budget is not to be a part of the "committed"
budget, thus giving each committee the flexibility to project a high "growth" budget not
to be included in the General Assembly's "askings" of the local churches.
(3)
There will be no change in processing designated funds. All of the committees will
continue to receive gifts both "committed" and "growth".
(4)
All funds received by any of the four committees not designated as "growth" will be
assumed to be "committed".
(5)
Said four pennanent committees shall be encouraged to submit revised budgets, if
necessary, to this Committee prioe to the General Assembly each year foe submission to
the General Assembly foe approval.
Adopted
1979, p. 77, 7-22,2. That this new Stewardship Committee supplant the prioe Stewardship
Committee; and that this new Committee be constituted as soon as possible after this General
Assembly by the assignment of its members by said four pennanent committees. That said
Committee immediately embark upon its task which shall include a system foe "askings" of
each local church for the support of the "committed" budgets of the four permanent committees
as approved by the General Assembly. That this Committee be funded in 1980 as an item in the
"committee" budgets of the four pennanent committees.
Adopted
1980, p. 110,8-80, III, 15. That the annual budget requests of all agencies whose budgets
must be approved by the Assembly be referred to the Committee on Stewardship Ministries foe
evaluation and commel)t rather than merely as information.
1980, p. 110,8-80, III, 16. Any permanent committee oe other agency of the Presbyterian
Church in America desiring foe good reasons to revise a budget previously approved by the
Assembly shall submit such budget revisions to the Sub-Committee on Stewardship.
1981, p. 363, Appendix N, II.
c.
That the General Assembly affirms its intention that the Coordinating, Planning and
Stewardship Committee shall do "preliminary" planning and goal-setting studies foe the
denomination, and shall recommend its findings annually for Assembly's deliberation
and decision.
d.
That the General Assembly further clarifies the function of the Coordinating, Planning
and Stewardship Committee by affirming its responsibility to review and evaluate the
budget requests of all agencies whose budgets must be approved by the Assembly
(M8GA, 8-BO-m-15), and recommend an annual budget to General Assembly.

243

PCADIGEST
STEWARDSHIP COMMIITEE
That the Coordinating, Planning and Stewardship Committee is to coordinate the
interpretive work of all committees of the General Assembly, and is itself the primary
interpreter of the One Mission of the Church at every level of the denomination. It is
responsible for developing and promoting a system of "askings" for congregational
support of the budget of the General Assembly.
f.
That the Coordinating, Planning and Stewardship Committee continues to be a subcommittee of the Committee on Administration, as provided for in the Bylaws, Article
IV, Section 10, for review and evaluation, but reporting directly to the General
Assembly through its own Committee of Commissioners. That the PeA Foundation
continues to be a sub-committee of the Coordinating, Planning and Stewardship
Committee, reporting through this Committee to the Committee on Administration for
its review and approval. It will then report directly to the General Assembly through its
own Committee of Commissioners.
1982, p. 116, 10-90,111, 14. Recognizing that our denomination is in a period of transition,
such as, Joining and Receiving, and that our entire denominational structure and coordination
need to be studied, and believing that the following recommendations are necessary to enable
the Stewardship Committee to fulfill its responsibilities in line with the above needs as
mandated by the Ninth General Assembly, the Committee of Commissioners on Stewardship
e.

recommends:
a.
That the General Assembly direct all boards and committees to send any
recommendations concerning long-range planning and goal-setting to the PSCSM for
review and submission to the General Assembly in accordance with item 9-56(8) Ninth
General Assembly.
b.
That all boards and committees also be permitted to present any recommendations
concerning long-range planning and goal-setting to the General Assembly through their
respective committees of commissioners.
c.
That the PSCSM clarify the role of the Director of Stewardship Ministries in all fund
raising activities related to the four permanent committees, and that their
recommendation as to the role of fund raising be submitted to the Eleventh General
Assembly for approval.
That the PSCSM be directed to study its function, organization, and position in the
d.
organizational structure of the General Assembly, and report its recommendations
through its Committee of Commissioners to the Eleventh General Assembly.
e.
That the Committee be permitted to secure competent consultation in making this study.
1983, p. 108, 11-43,32, Attachment K, III, A. That all present functions and personnel of
the PSCSM be assigned to the Committee on Administration.
1983, p. 131, 11-75, III, 12, b. That PSCSM, which is responsible for coordinating,
planning and budgetary review, seek to develop a method which will better coordinate both the
appeals and promotional materials which are sent to the local churches for each calendar year.
NAME

1981, p. 363, Appendix N, 11,3, a. That the Sub-Committee on Stewardship Ministries be
renamed the "Coordinating, Planning and Stewardship Committee". This requires a change in
the Bylaws, Article IV, Section 10. changing the name of the Committee. wherever it appears.
to conform with this recommendation.
PROMOTIONAL WORK

1981, p. 116, 9-56, III, 8, d. That the Stewardship Committee is to coordinate the
promotional work of all committees of the General Assembly. and is itself the primary
communicator of the one mission of the Church at every level of the denomination. It is
responsible for developing and promoting a system of "askings" for congregational support of
the budget of the General Assembly.

244

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
TONGUES
SUBSCRIPTION
(See CONFESSIONAL SUBSCRIPTION)

TAX GROUP EXEMPTION
(See PART V: POsmON PAPERS. Tax Group Exemption. pp. SS3-S54)

TELEVISION
(See RADIO)

THANKSGMNG
1991. p. 172. 19-67.111. 19.
Whereas. Almighty God has graciously granted a swift end to the war in the Persian Gulf. and
Whereas. in the providence of God the casualties of this war were kept to a minimum:
Therefore. Be it resolved that the 19th General Assembly of the PCA in accord with Scriptural
example and BCO Chapter 62. calls foe a general day of thanksgiving to God on July 7.
1991; and
That thanksgiving specifically focus on the graciousness of God foe answering the prayers of
his people for peace; and
That thanksgiving be tempered with intercessory prayer on behalf of the many individuals and
families who suffered loss during the war. as well as foe restoration from devastation
caused to the environment in that region.
Be it further resolved that the Stated Clerk of the General Assembly be instructed to
communicate this resolution to the churches by the most expedient as well as

economical means.
THEOLOGICAL EDUCATION
(See MINISTER. PREPARATION FOR THE MINISTRY. Candidacy. Uniform Curriculum;
PART V: POSmON PAPERS. Unifonn Curriculum. pp. SS7-560; Guidelines foe Theological
Education. pp. 561-56S)

THEONOMY
(See also PART U: INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION. WCF 19-4. 1983.
11-36. 29; PART m: JUDICIAL CASES. '16. #86; PART V: POSmON PAPERS.
Theonomy.pp.SSS-S56)
1978. p. 74. 6-45. Resolution 4
Be it resol\'ed that the General Assembly appoint an Ad-Interim Committee for the purpose of
studying the subject of Theonomy and to report baclc to the Seventh General Assembly.
1978. p. 81. 6-63. II. D. Resolutioo 4. Your Committee recommends that this matter be
referred to the General Assembly Committee on Christian Education and Publications foe a
definition of Theonomy and that the CM Committee make recommendations to the Seventh
General Assembly regarding disposition of this matter. (See PART V: POSmON PAPERS.
Theonomy. pp. SSS-S56)

TONGUES
(See SPIRITUAL GIFfS; PART m: JUDICIAL CASES. #61; PART V: POSmON
PAPERS. Spiritual Gifts. pp. 543-SS1)

245

PCADIGEST

TRUSTEE
(See CHURCH, TRUSTEE)

UNIFORM CURRICULUM
(See MINISTER, PREPARATION FOR THE MINISTRY, Candidacy; PART V: POSmON
PAPERS, Uniform Curriculum, pp. 557-560; Guidelines for Theological Education, pp. 561565)
VISIBLE REPRESENTATION OF CHRISf
1983, p. 117, 11-50, II, 7. Personal Resolution 12, was answered as follows: That the
General Assembly reminds its churches that in our understanding of Scripture we would reject
any visible representation of Christ or the use of religious symbols as objects of worship, but
that the particulars in this resolution do not warrant the type of action requested.
WFSrMINSTER SfANDARDS
1973, p. 31, 1-31. Doctrinal Standards Adopted
The General Assembly of the national Presbyterian Church adopted the following doctrinal
standards as the bond of union:
1.
The Westminster Confession 0/ Faith as proposed by the Steering Committee for the
Continuing Presbyterian Church.
2.
The unamended Westminster Larger and Shorter Catechisms
[Note: See Appendix A. pages 76-126. for the text of these doctrinal standards.]
1973, p. 64, 1-81, 5. [Authority granted to correspond with other Churches on updating the
language of the Westminster Standards. and to work on Scripture proofs.] The Constitutional
Documents Committee was granted authority to work with corresponding committees of the
Orthodox Presbyterian Church. the Reformed Presbyterian Church, Evangelical Synod, and the
Reformed Presbyterian Church of North America on both an updating of the language of the
Westminster Standards. and on Scripture proof texts of the same.
1976, p. 66,4-57, 4. In light of the discussion of the Bills and Overture Committee. the
Fourth General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America reaffirms its commitment to
the Confession o/Faith, especially chapter 31. paragraph 4 on all related matters.
1977, p. 64, 5-33, d. The Assembly adopted the following recommendation regarding
Scripture proofs: That the General Assembly give tentative approval of the Scripture proofs
found in the Free Presbyterian Church of Scotland edition of the Westminster Confession and
Catechisms. with the substitution of those texts found in the Orthodox Presbyterian edition for
the chapter on Civil magistrates. That the Assembly authorize the Committee for Christian
Education and Publication to print a study edition of the Confession and Catechisms with these
Scriptural proofs, with the understanding that they may be amended and receive final approval
at a subsequent Assembly. That the Assembly adopt the position that such proof texts should
not become a formal part of the Constitution.
WIlLS
1981, p. 115,9-56, III, 4. That each church in the Assembly be encouraged to participate
in a Wills Seminar for the benefit of its members.

246

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS

WOMEN IN THE CHURCH (WIC)
BYLAWS

(See PART V: POsmON PAPERS, Women in the Church, p. 566)
FOUNDING AND DEVEWPMENT

(See PART V: POsmON PAPERS, Women in the Church, p. 566)
WVEGIFr

1973, p. 58, 1-77, 16. That the WIC take an annual offering in February to be given to
some Assembly approved project
1974, p. 77, 2-102, IV, 9. That the Assembly approve the Production of Radio Programs by
the Mission to the US Committee as the object for the 1975 Love Gift of the WIC;
1975, p. 89, 3-77, 12. That the General Assembly approve the Tuberculosis Clinic and
Rehabilitation Center, Korea--a ministry of the Rev. and Mrs. Hugh Linton, as the object for the
1976 Love Gift offering of the Women in the Church.
1976, p. 84, 4-80, 8. The approval of the preparation of a Youth Ministries Manual as the
object for the 1977 Love Gift of the WIC.
1977, p. 77, 5-72, III, 17. That the project sponsored by the MUS Committee, namely,
"The Mobile Church Project", be the object for the 1978 Love Gift of the WIC.
1978, p. 85, 6-75, III, 5. That the 1979 Love Gift for MTW, special church building
projects in Mexico and Ecuador, be approved.
1979, p. 113,7-49, III, 9. That the Assembly approve the project of the Conference Center
(Ridge Haven) for the 1980 Love Gift.
1980, p. 73, 8-29, III, 17. That the 1981 Love Gift of the Women in the Church be
designated for Christian Education and Publications to be used in the developing of an audiovisual training department by the committee, and that they be commended for the support for
the 1980 Love Gift.
1981, p. 90,9-36, III, 8. That the Assembly approve designation of the 1982 WIC Gift for
a center city ministry in New York City, through Mission to the United States.
1982, p. 65, 10-31, III, 14. That the 1983 WIC Love Gift project for MTW be designated
for an audiovisual presentation for radio station HCJB in Quito, Ecuador.
1983, p. 131,11-75, III, 9. That the WIC be thanked for their generous support of the 1982
Love Gift, and that the 1984 Love Gift project be designated for Covenant College.
1984, p. 105,12-36, 111,8. That the 1985 WIC Love Gift be designated to the COA project
of establishing a denominational archives.
1985, p. 86, 13-30, III, 2. That the 1986 WIC Love Gift be designated for Covenant
Theological Seminary and that the WIC be thanked for their gift of $60,000 to Covenant
College for 1984.
1986, p. 137,14-57, III, 8. That the General Assembly thank the Women In the Church for
their 1986 Love Gift, and accept the $75,000 challenge to be matched by a $25,000 gift, if met
by December 31, 1986.
1986, p. 146, 14-67, III, 11. That the General Assembly join together in expressing
gratitude to the WIC for their generous support of the 1985 COA (Archives) Love Gift A total
of $55,321 was contributed.
1987, p. 148, 15-66, III.
4.
That the Women In the Church be commended for their generous contribution to the
1986 Love Gift for Covenant Seminary. They raised $100,000 dollars for the seminary
wives project, which set a new record.
5.
That the General Assembly urge sessions to encourage their local WIC to view the
1987 WIC Love Gift program and consider making a contribution before the end of the
year. The 1987 Love Gift will go to CE/P for expanding the WIC ministry in the PCA.

247

PCADIGEST
WOMEN IN mE CHURCH
That the 1988 WIC Love Gift project be directed to Mission to North America and their
cross-cultural ministries project.
1988, p. 121, 16-33, III, 5. That the 1989 WIC Love Gift designated for Ridge Haven
Conference Center be approved.
1989, p. 81, 17-47, III, 5. That the WIC be thanked for their support and commitment of
the 1988 Love Gift for MNA for its church planting effort in New York City (over $100,000
was contributed).
Adopted
1989, p. 81,17-47, III, 6. That the 1990 WIC Love Gift be designated to MTW. Adopted
1990, p. 98, 18-34, III, 3. That the Assembly be aware of the outstanding support of the
Assembly's committees and agencies from the Women in the Church annual Love Gift noting
with thanksgiving that the 1989 Love Gift to Ridge Haven Conference Center was $79,249 plus
a matching gift for a total of $125,032.
Adopted
1990, p. 98, 18-34, III, 4. That the Assembly concur with the recommendation of the
Women in the Church and the CM Committee that the 1991 Love Gift be given to Insurance
and Annuities and Relief for ministerial relief.
Adopted
1991, p. 72, 19-27, III, 4. That the PCA WIC be commended for their 1990 Love Gift of
$103,000 to Mission to the World.
Adopted
1991, p. 73, 19-27, III, 6. That the 1992 Love Gift, according to the WIC rotation
Adopted
schedule, be designated to CFJP and its Women in the Church ministry.
1992, p. 82,20-36, III, 1. That the 20th General Assembly express gratitude to the Women
in the Church for their generous support of the 1991 Love Gift designated to IAR (over $94,000
was contributed).
Adopted
1992, p. 82,20-36, III, 2. That the 20th General Assembly approve the 1993 WIC Love
Adopted
Gift designation for Investor's Fund.
1992, p. 82, 20-36, III, 3. That the 20th General Assembly encourage local churches to
participate in the 1992 WIC Love Gift, designated to CE&P and its WIC ministry. (The video
presentation is also part of the WIC's curriculum for local churches regarding WIC ministries.)
Adopted
1993, p. 74, 21-24, III, 5. That the PCA express thanks to the Women in the Church for
their generous Love Gift contribution in the amount of $110,000 to CFJP's WIC to expand their
ministry.
Adopted
1993, p. 74, 21-24, III, 7. That the 1994 WIC Love Gift be given to Covenant College.
Adopted
6.

MANUAL

1973, p. 59, 1-77, 35. The Suggested Manua~ Women in the Church (Local) was approved.
(See Minutes of the First General Assembry)
ORGANIZE

1983, p. 131,11-75, III, 8. That local churches and presbyteries desiring to organize WIC

groups be encouraged to contact the CFJP office for materials and consultation.
WOMEN'S SERVICE ON ASSEMBLY COMMITI'EES

1989, p. 183, 17-95.
Coostitutional Inquiry 1
May a non-ordained person serve in a voting capacity on a General Assembly
committee?
Coostitutionallnquiry 2
2.
In what appropriate manner may a woman function with or on an ad-interim committee
of the General Assembly?
1.

248

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS
WORSHIP
The following answers were adopted:
1.
No. BCD 14 and Bylaws Article IV, Section 10.F;
2.
There is no provision for a woman to function on an ad interim committee. The
Assembly might allow women to serve in an advisory capacity with a committee.
Examples of such approval might be found in the Minutes of the FllSt General
Assembly approving the establishment by Christian Education and Publications of the
Women's Advisory Committee and in the permanent Committee on Judicial Business
Manual. TE Rick Tyson requested his negative vote be recorded (in opposition to the
Committee's recommendation).

WORLD COUNCIL OF CHURCHES
(See INTERCHURCH RELATIONS)

WORLD PRFSBYTERIAN MISSIONS, INC.
(See also PART IV: BYLAWS, MANUALS AND GUIDELINES, Mission to the World;
PART V: rosmoN PAPERS, Joint Statement on Joining & Receiving, pp. 411-413)
1982, p. 76, 10-48,111,24. That in line with the request of the Board of World Presbyterian
Missions, Inc., the subcommittee representing the WPM ministries be enlarged to eight
members and two alternates.
1982, p. 76,10-48,111,25. That the General Assembly issue a call foe a special offering for
World Presbyterian Missions, Inc., on the third Sunday in September.
1982, p. 76, 10-48, III, 27. That Personal Resolution 15 from TE Nelson Malkus be
answered as follows: That we express our love and appreciation for the people and testimony
of World Presbyterian Missions, and recognize the great worldwide witness for Christ which
has been given in His Name in the past decades; and yet, that there is no definite or compelling
reason to continue the name World Presbyterian Missions in view of the similar and yet
distinctive witness of Mission to the Wodd in the past decade; we express our desire to retain
the name Mission to the World for our combined foreign missions committee.
1983, p. 84, 11-30, III, 37. That the 501 (3)(C) corporate entity of WPM and any other
remaining 501 (3)(C) corporations of the RPCES should be continued under Committee of
Administration as corporate entities in cooperation with the permanent committees. It is the
intent of the General Assembly that these corporations shall remain inactive corporations under
the Committee of Administration.

WORSHIP
1974, p. 74, 2-99, II, 3. That Overture 6, p. 24, proposing preparation of a service book of
liturgical forms, be answered as follows;
It is our understanding that this matter is under consideration by the Committee on
Constitutional Documents, and we call attention also to the fact that optional fonns foe special
worship occasions are available from such sources as The Book of Common Prayer.
1986, p. 178, 14-81. Report of the Ad Hoc Committee Appointed by the Moderator to
Draft a Response to the Protest of Certain Members of the Fourteenth General Assembly Who
Protested Over the Monday and Tuesday Worship Services (June 23 and 24,1986)
The protest (14-61, p. 141) lodged concerns the character of the Monday and Tuesday
evening programs alleging that they did not represent the worship of refonned character with
which the General Assembly usually begins its morning sessions.

249

PCADIGEST
WORSHIP

In answer it may at first be said that the usual morning worship services are not long about twenty minutes. The evening programs were intended to combine a worship time with
programs which would illustrate and advance the great commission through the committees of
the General Assembly. The programs were to include worship, but were not intended to be
exclusively worship.
The protest said that the programs were not reformed in character, and
that the
preaching of the Word of God occupied a minor place in the worship. We reply that the proper
elements of reformed worship were included: On Monday, after two well-known hymns from
Hymnal came a Scriptural anthem, the sermon text was presented, and was followed
the
by a full expository sermon by Dr. Clowney on that Scripture passage. On Tuesday, likewise,
there were hymns, prayer, sermon, and benediction. The parts of the programs that presented
choral and instrumental music were Biblical in character, and the films were instructive in the
work of the great commission.
Exception was taken to the clapping during some of the singing and the applause after
some performances. It should be remembered that these were part of the program emphasizing
ethnic missions. If the tempo would be not attractive to some, our tempo and customs may not
be attractive abroad where bongo drums may be the usual accompaniment, (BCO 47-6).
The applause was a natural response of appreciation for a good presentation of
Scripture truth. The human singing voice is a marvelous gift of God and to applaud it when
used in Scriptural song is both to show appreciation to the singer and thanks to God the author
of all our gifts. To show respect and appreciation of fellow Christians is a debt of honor and
respect. Romans 13:8 commands us not to leave such a debt outstanding. The Psalmist, after
having listed many instruments and various modes of worship, including dancing in the
assembly of his people, invites his people to join the Lord in delighting in his people's worship
(Psalm 149). One mode by which the Psalmist expressed this "delight," elsewhere, was to join
in clapping with the assembled people of God (Psalm 47).
The programs included the appropriate elements of reformed worship and added to the
appreciation and understanding of the work of the Great Commission through our committees.
Insofar as the evening program contained worship, that worship was agreeable to
Scripture, was a Biblical expression of the Regulative Principle of Worship, and conformed to
BC047 & 49.

rnnity

YEARBOOK
1973. p. 46. 1-66. 10. That the General Assembly ask the Stated Clerk to make available as
soon as possible to all member churches of this denomination not only a list of member
churches but also a list of those areas in which this denomination is beginning mission churches
and that the General Assembly encourage all pastors and churches who have families leaving
their area and moving into an area where there is a church or mission work of this denomination
to affiliate with the church or mission church in the area where they are moving.
1979. p. 113.7-49. III. 12. That the Stated Clerk be instructed to include the names of the
Chainnen of the Boards of Deacons in the local churches in the Yearbook, along with the Clerks
of the Sessions.
1982. p. 69. 10-33. Ill. 13. That hereafter, the Yearbook of the PCA not be distributed free
of charge to ministers, clerks of sessions, etc., but be sold at prices set by the office of the Stated
Clerk. Rationale: prices may fluctuate.
1986. p. 172. 14-74. Ill. 35. That the publication of a list of PCA churches and/or ministers
including the Yearbook contain a statement restricting its use to PCA congregations,
presbyteries, and agencies be approved.

250

ASSEMBLY ACTIONS

YOUTIf MINISTRIES
1988, p. 172, 16-77, 11[, 8. That the advice of the Committee on Judicial Business
regarding the Committee's Advice to the Stated Clerk be ratified.
Advice requested concerning the listing of disciplinary action in Yearbook.
ADVICE:
1.
In the year disciplined the Yearbook should show what happened, and it should remain
in the Yearbook until his name is dropped from the Presbytery rolls, or the censure is
removed.
2.
In the year restored it should show what happened.
3.
In subsequent years, use brackets showing the dates and a reference to the two
yearbooks that included the record, e.g. [74-79 See Ybk 75, Ybk 80].

YOUTII MINISTRIFS
(See CE&P, PIONEER CLUBS; YOUTH MINISTRIES; EDUCATION, CONFERENCES AND
SEMINARS; MNA, COLLEGE CAMPUS WORK)

I
I
I

251

