    PART II:



INTERPRETATIONS

      OF

     THE

 CONSTITUTION
I                       INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION



I                            WESTMINSTER CONFESSION OF FAITH


I   WCF4-1
         (See PART III, JUDICIAL CASE #100)                                                 III, p. 99


I
1
    d.
            1995,p.197,M23GA,23-43,31.d
            That the response to the exceptions of the 22 0d GA be approved as satisfactory in that it
            does provide adequate infonnation.
            NOTE: The Committee on Review of Presbytery Records recommended: "That this
    response be not found satisfactory because although the Presbytery's response does clarify the
    exceptions to the PCA standards taken by the candidate approved for ordination, the Presbytery
    does not give us a statement that they will not in the future approve for ordination a candidate
    with exceptions that deny fundamentals of our system of doctrine such as Creation in six days
    (LC 15, Exodus 20:8-12) and limitation of ordained offices to men (BCO 7-2);
            That New River Presbytery be directed to re-examine the brother in the area of six day
    Creation;
    e.      "Concerning WCF 4-1 (Creation), the TE believes that "It is not scientifically impossible
            for God to create the universe in six days since He is omnipotent. The point is that the
            Word of God does not set out such a scientific plan but rather emphasizes the unique
            power of God to create out of nothing and in accordance with His perfect will."


                                    BOOK OF CHURCH ORDER


            1994 (See Part III, JUDICIAL CASE #101)                                        III, p. 104


            1994 (See PART III, JUDICIAL CASE #101)                                        III, p. 104


            1997, p. 114,25-17,2:
            Proposed amendments to permit minimum voting age defeated by presbyteries.

    11-2 (NOTE: Originally 12-2)
             1976, p. 72,4-71, III, A:
             ''With respect to a communication from Rev. Donald Dunkerley concerning the over-
    sight of a church without a session but with at least one ruling elder, the Committee would direct
    attention to Paragraph 12-2 of the Book of Church Order beginning with the word "secondly"
    and continuing through the end of the paragraph which gives church courts latitude to establish
    rules as needed agreeable with Scripture and doctrines which are not in violation of the
    Constitution of the Church."


            1994 (See PART m, JUDICIAL CASE #101)                                          In, p. 104




                                                   71
                                           peA DIGEST




        1994 (See PART III, JUDICIAL CASE #101)                                            III, p. 104


         1994, p. 70, 22-13, 3.1
Question: Part 1 - "Was the action of the 20th GA in approving item IV.4.j. on the report of the
Committee on Review of Presbytery Records, specifically that portion which reads as follows:
"(financial amounts need not be included)", particularly as it relates to BCG 13-10 and RAO 14-
10 d.3 constitutional?"
Answer:
         "BCG 13-10 requires that presbyteries keep a "full and accurate" record of proceedings
and that the record be sent up to General Assembly for review. The same citation continues to
elaborate particular infonnation required to be included in that "full and accurate record" of
proceedings.
         "RAO 14-10 d.3 notes that the Presbytery is required to record "actions", including
motions adopted and business transacted by the Presbytery. Beyond that, the authority to include
any additional infonnation in the record is specifically granted to the presbyteries. Clear
constitutional discretion is granted to the Presbytery to decide what "additional" material may be
appropriate for inclusion in the minutes. The report of the committee adopted by the 20th GA
indicates that General Assembly considers the report of the action presbyteries take regarding
changes in the calls of ministers to be an appropriate requirement of the "full and accurate"
record of the presbytery. General Assembly went on to indicate that the detail of including
financial amounts is not a requirement of a "full and accurate" record. However, it is the opinion
of the CCB that the action taken by the General Assembly indicates that any "additional
information" included in the minutes of a presbytery is, by definition, a part of the "full and
accurate" record. That is to say, whatever is included in the minutes of a presbytery must be sent
up to General Assembly as a part of the "full and accurate" record. The constitutional discretion
granted presbyteries is to decide what additional infonnation is important enough to be included,
not which part of the "full and accurate" record to submit to the review of the General Assembly.
The presbytery is obligated to submit for review whatever is recorded in the minutes of that body.
It does not have the constitutional authority to purge, edit, delete, alter or otherwise adulterate its
"full and accurate" record approved in the form of the minutes of its proceedings.
         "Therefore, it is not unconstitutional for a presbytery to submit its records for review in a
form that does not refer to the financial details of a change in a minister's call. It is, however,
unconstitutional for any presbytery to change the record for the purposes of submission for
review. If the action taken by presbytery included reference to financial details as a part of the
motion passed or other fonnal action of the body, that financial infonnation is part of the "full
and accurate" record to be included for review."


        1996, p. 159, 24-23, ref. #1
        Does BCG 13-12 prohibit a presbytery from having a called meeting, except upon the
concurrence of a certain number that an "extreme emergency" exists, and what is the meaning of
the word "emergency?"
Response:
        It is the advice of the CCB that the answer to the meaning of the word "emergency" be
understood by its plain and ordinary definition, as given by Webster's Dictionary. Webster's


                                                  72
                     INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION



defines "emergency" as an "unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that
calls for immediate action."
         The procedure recommended to Central Georgia Presbytery by the Session of the First
Presbyterian Church of Augusta, Georgia to ascertain whether or not there is an emergency is in
conflict with BCO 13-12. To determine if there is an "emergency" is in effect to determine if
presbytery should meet. The procedure, under consideration by Central Georgia Presbytery, to
establish that six (6) of eight (8) officers and committee chairs concur that an "extreme
emergency" exists before a meeting of presbytery is called, violates the constitutional rights of
the moderator, stated clerk, two (2) ruling elders, and two (2) teaching elders from at least three
(3) churches to call a special meeting.
         The CCB notes that BCO 13-12 specifies "any" emergency, not an "extreme" emergency.


         1994, p. 71,22-13,4.
Question: "In BCO 15-1, the "it" of line 6 seems to be ambiguous. Does it refer to the "full
record of its proceedings" of line 4 or to the "concluding actions of the commission" of line 5?"
Answer:
         The definition of this word is clarified when compared with the procedure delineated in
BCO 15-3. Here it is clearly stated that the "judgment of the commission shall be final and shall
be entered on the minutes of Presbytery as the action." It is the opinion of the CCB that the "it"
of line 6 refers to the "concluding actions of the commission" which are recorded in the minutes
of presbytery since they become the action of the presbytery, once approved."
         1997, p. 134,25-22, 2ad Supplemental Report, 1,1:
         Can the Standing Judicial Commission adjudicate an issue or matter that was not referred
to or laid before it?
Response: It is the opinion of the CCB that the answer is: No.
         The CCB reminds the Assembly that it is the duty of the SJC to assemble and frame
from the complaint, briefl:s), and record of the case, the summary of the facts and the statement of
the issues in any case. New issues are never to be initiated by the SJC so as to make it a court of
original jurisdiction. h is the responsibility of the Assembly to decide whether the statement of
the issues has been framed properly, which will be reflected by what the Assembly votes: shall
the judgment be approved, disapproved, or referred to a study committee.


        1997, p. 80, 25-16, 5 (see also Part III Judicial Case #136)                     III, p. 226
        1997, p. 93, 25-16 (see also Part III Judicial Case #138)                        III,p.237

       1998, p. 233, 26-68, re "reference"
       The Committee received a reference from the Assembly regarding the report of the
Committee of Commissioners on Interchurch Relations, regarding the serving of an alternate
member as chairman of a committee and the voting of an alternate member when not necessary to
comprise a quorum in the absence of regular members. The Committee's opinion is as follows.

        A.      In regard to an alternate member's serving as chairman, it is the opinion of
the Committee that there is nothing in the Constitution which prohibits an alternate member's
serving as chairman of a committee. Robert's Rules of Order, chapter XV, section 46, states
that evm someone totally outside the membership of a body may serve as its chairman if the body


                                                73
                                           peA DIGEST



 so desires. Such an individual could not vote (e.g. to break a tie) if not a voting member, but this
 does not bear on his serving as chairman.
           B.      In regard to an alternate member's voting when such vote is not needed to
 fulfill the requirements for a quorum, it is the opinion of the Committee that there is no
 Constitutional provision which bars a committee's allowing an alternate to fill any vacancy and
 therefore to be eligible to vote, whenever a principal is absent. Further, the Ninth General
 Assembly tacitly approved this very procedure when it approved the Operations Manual for the
 Committee on Constitutional Business (adopted by the Ninth General Assembly, 19S1, p.123,
 9-65, III, G, 4, and revised and adopted in 1991; see section 1.3).



          1996, p. 160,24-23, ref. #3
          In our Presbytery, a minister shepherds a non-PCA church. From time to time men come
 forward from that congregation desiring to become candidates for the ministry. How may a
 Presbytery require the fulfillment of the six-month PCA membership and sessional endorsement
 requirements (BCO IS-2) for a man who desires to become a candidate but is a member of a
 non-PC A church?
 Response:
          It is the advice of the CCB that the BCO IS-2 probably indicates, but does not specify,
 that a prospective candidate must be a member of a PCA congregation for at least six months
 before filing his application for candidacy. Some PCA presbyteries, however, have interpreted
 BCO IS-2 to allow them to accept the endorsement of a prospective candidate from a non-PC A
 congregation, understanding that the candidate must "submit himself to the care and guidance of
 the Presbytery in his course of study and of practical training to prepare himself for this office"
 (BCO IS-I). Through the General Assembly's review of presbytery minutes, this procedure has
 been affirmed, in that some presbyteries, in the past, have accepted a candidate's endorsement
 from non-PCA congregations.
          It is the advice of the CCB that an Overture should be submitted clearly specifying that a
 candidate could be endorsed by the ruling body of a non-PC A church.



         1994 (See PART III, JUDICIAL CASE #100)                                           III, p. 99


          1981, p. 142, 9-65, II, I, 2. Implementation of Internship requirement: "That the
 General Assembly set as a procedure of implementation of the required year of licensure for
 ministerial candidates that it be understood that this would apply only to candidates or seminarian
 not yet in the process. All new candidates would therefore come under this ruling."        Adopted


         1994, p. 70,22-13,2.
 Question: "According to BCO 21-1, does a presbytery place a call in a man's hands before he is
 examined?"
 Answer: It is the advice of the CCB that there is ambiguity in the BCO regarding the sequence
of events relative to the placing of a call in a candidates hands and the examination of that


                                                 74
1
                         INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION
I
I   candidate. There is, however, no ambiguity in terms of the requirements for a call and the
    examination process. These requirements include the extension of a call by a calling body, the
    approval of that call by the presbytery and the examination of the candidate by the presbytery.
    Assuming all requirements are met, the current practice is that each presbytery determines the
    sequence of these events relative to approval of a call and the examination. Until such time that
    the GA acts to resolve these ambiguities, the current practice should prevail."


             1997, p. 128,25-22, II, 1:
     1.      Is a candidate for ordination required to declare a formal exception to the standards if he
             does not hold to a literal six 24-hour day period of creation?
    2.       Is an officer who has been previously ordained required by the second ordination vow to
             inform his Presbytery or Session of being out of accord with the standards if he does not
             hold to a literal six 24-hour day period of creation?
    Response:
             It is the advice of the CCB that GA take no action on the New River resolution [BCO 41-
    5, RAO 7-2(2)].
             Although there is some question whether the resolution from New River Presbytery,
    adopted at its 69th Meeting, is a proper reference, since there apparently is no associated matter
    pending before the Presbytery (BCO 41-1), the CCB received the resolution. To answer the
    resolution would ipso facto make the CCB responsible for determining previously-unspecified
    exceptions to the Constitution. Should a presbytery wish to establish its own view of what is an
    exception to the constitutional standards as normative for the rest of the Church, then the proper
    procedure would be to overture the GA to adopt the presbytery's view as the view of the Church
    and to enter the same into the constitutional standards of the PCA.


             1995, p. 56,23-15, II, Reference No.1.
             Does BCO 23-1 mean that if a pastor resigns his call, without another call, then is the
     congregation required to vote on his financial severance package?
     Response:
             It is the advice of the CCB that the answer to Reference No. 1 from Central Georgia
     Presbytery is: yes.
             1998, p. 231, 26-68, 1It Supplemental Report, III:
             Advice to Korean Capital Presbytery. On a request from the Korean Capital
     Presbytery for a "ruling" on a non-judicial matter, which had been forwarded to the Committee
     by the stated clerk, the Committee on motion voted to concur with the advice which the stated
     clerk had already previously given in response to an inquiry from the Presbytery.

                                                                                         June 22, 1998

     TO:     Korean Capital Presbytery
             % Rev. Andy Chul-Soon Lee                                 FIRST CLASS
                                                                          and FAX 301-424-4964
    FROM: Paul R. Gilchrist, Stated Clerk of General Assembly




                                                    75
                                           peA DIGEST



SUBJECT: ADVICE RE. BCO 23-1 FOR GLORIA KOREAN PRESBYTERIAN
           CHURCH

          In response to your request for a ruling on the distribution of a pastoral relationship, I
render hereby my considered opinion.
          Gloria Korean Presbyterian Church has a bylaw requiring a 2/3 vote of the congregation
to call a pastor. And BCO 23-1 calls for the action on the dissolution of a pastor to be " .... in
the same manner as the call of the pastor. "
          The context makes clear that "a meeting of the congregation called and conducted in the
same manner as the call of the pastor. "
          It is my considered opinion that BCO 23-1 refers back to BCO 20 both for the calling of
a congregational meeting as well as for its conduct - i.e., the methods of voting, etc.
          If the congregation decides to require a 2/3 vote for calling a pastor, that is their
prerogative. In this case they have made it clear by adopting a specific statement in their Bylaws.
          If the congregation wishes to adopt a 2/3 vote for the dissolution of a pastoral relation,
they should also approve such a percentage if they so desire. BCO 20-4 only requires a majority
vote. In any case, the Bylaws of Gloria Korean Presbyterian Church do not explicitly say that
for the dissolution it also must be 2/3 vote. They would have to vote on this matter to make it
explicit.
          Let me urge the presbytery and the congregation to be cautious about changing a vote to
dissolve the pastoral relation from a simple majority to a 2/3 vote. The reason is simple: What if
the congregation votes only 60% to dissolve, and 40% to oppose? This would be short of the
66.7% required. It seems to me foolhardy for the presbytery to retain the pastor in that pulpit
when only 40% really support him. (Surely, it would be contrary to a simple majority the BCO
requires for a minimum vote for a call.) Why would presbytery seek to retain him with only 40%
approval? This seems to contradict the principle of BCO 3-1 that to the congregation belongs the
power in 'lhe choice of those officers whom He has appointed in His Church." This principle is
also spelled out in the Preface to BCO 11-6 'lhe power to elect persons to the exercise of authority
in any particular society resides in the society."
          Quite frankly, a 2/3 vote would also put a pastor in a serious personal dilemma if he
were to defeat a motion for dissolution by 40% or 35% voting in favor of reconfirming him.
Could he really continue to minister to the whole congregation when he does not have at least a
majority of the congregation behind him?
          In short, to change the vote ratio for dissolution of the pastoral relationship from a simple
majority is (1) to go contrary to the Biblical and Church Order principle that by a majority vote
or better a congregation has a right to "elect persons" to office - and that this right is inalienable;
(2) to court disaster for the congregation, and (3) to put the pastor in an untenable position.
          There are my considered opinions and as always, subject to being overruled by my
brethren in the General Assembly.


         196, p. 160, 24-23, ref. #2
         "Does such a nominee, who has previously served in the office to which he is currently
nominated in a particular church, need to be re-examined by the Session in any (or all) of the
areas listed in BCO 24-1, and could such a man, in the light of BCO 24-6, be found deficient in
any area (e.g., Christian experience.) and consequently disapproved?"



                                                  76
                     INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION



         Response:
                   It is the advice of the CCB that the answer to the first part of Reference No. 2
         from Southeast Alabama Presbytery is yes. All nominees for ruling elder or deacon
         should be examined by the Session in accord with BCO 24-1, including the re-
         examination of someone who has previously served in that same office in that particular
         church.
                   It is noted, however, that the Session determines the length or brevity of each
         examination, depending in part on the Session's knowledge of the individual, his life,' and
         views. In addition, the principle involved in a similar situation should be considered - that
         is, the re-examination of a PCA teaching elder by a PCA presbytery in which he is
         examined in terms of his views, but not his knowledge (BCO 13-6; also refer to BCO
         21-4 [2-5]).
                   It is the advice of the CCB that the answer to the second part of Reference No.2
         from Southeast Alabama Presbytery is yes. The right of examination always includes
         the right to find a nominee deficient in certain areas and consequently to disapprove the
         nominee.
         1997, p. 136,25-22, ref. #2
         At the Eighty-eighth Stated Meeting of Grace Presbytery, held on the 13th of May, 1997,
the Presbytery, in attempting to adjudicate a complaint against the action of the session of one of
our churches, entered into a debate as to the meaning of BCO 24-1, which states that "Public
notice (of a congregational meeting to elect church officers) shall be given of the time, place, and
purpose of this meeting at least one month prior to the appointed time, during which time the
congregation is asked to submit names to the Session . . ." & etc. The adjudication of the
complaint and the resolution of the matter hinges upon the understanding of this passage, to wit:
whether a session may require that nominations for church officers be tendered by a deadline
which is less than the one month required before the meeting to act on these nominations are to be
acted upon, or whether the nomination period must be left open for the entire one month period.
         Pursuant to the provisions of BCO 41-1 & 2, the Presbytery voted to make a reference to
the General Assembly on this matter in the hope that some clarification might obviate the need
for this matter to be addressed judicially beyond the Presbytery level. In making this reference,
the Presbytery is asking only for advice (BCO 41-3) in order that it may adjudicate the complaint.
We are not asking for a final disposition of the case. Presbytery asserts its desire to discharge its
responsibility in this matter (BCO 41-5), but is almost evenly divided on the meaning of the
language of BCO 24-1, and prays the assistance of the Assembly in clarifying this language.
Response:
         It is the advice of the CCB that the following is the proper understanding of BCO 24-1 :
         BCO 24-1 imposes several requirements preparatory to the election of officers:
                   1)        public notice of the time, place, and purpose of a meeting to elect
                             officers must be given;
                   2)        such notice must be given at least one month before the meeting;
                   3)        the congregation must be allowed to make nominations;
                   4)        nominees must receive instruction;
                   5)        nominees must be examined; and
                   6)        the session must report the names of those eligible for election prior to
                             election day.
         It logically follows that this whole process may be held in as little as one month. It also
follows that requirements 4, 5, and 6 above must be held after the period of nominati~s is
closed, if the above order is followed step by step.

                                                 77
                                         PCADIGEST



         Conceivably the period of nominations could be as little as one day and still conform to
BCO 24-1. Practically, a longer time is preferable. In any case requirements 4,5, and 6 must be
completed prior to election day. Naturally, this order of procedure prohibits keeping the
nomination period open right up to election day, as well as prohibiting nominations from the
floor.
         However, BCO 24-1 does not require that the above order be followed, only that each
element be included without fail. A session could establish a period of instruction for all male
members interested in being considered for nomination and election. On completion of the
instruction, the session could examine all those who complete the course and certify any or all of
them as eligible for nomination. The session could then set the date, time, and place for election
(at least one month in advance) and call for nominations from the congregation, listing as
potential nominees those men who were examined and certified. This period of nomination could
extend right up to just prior to election day, when the session would then make its final report.
Other rearrangements of the required six elements could also be adopted.
         The CCB therefore advises specifically that
         1)       a session may require that nominations for church officers be tendered by a
                  deadline short of the minimum one-month period of time between the
                  announcement of a meeting to elect officers and the occurrence of that meeting;
                  and
         2)       it would seem that, ordinarily, a session would wish to set a significantly longer
                  period of time than the minimum time allowed, in order to accomplish the
                  instruction, examination, and reporting explicitly called for in BCO 24-1.


        1994 (See PART III, JUDICIAL CASE #105)                                         III, p. 125


        1995 (see Part III, Judicial Case #113)                                         III, p. 160

         1998, p. 228,26-68, reference #R-l
              "Must Presbytery Proceed to Trial Without Thorough Investigation?"
Response:
         It is the advice of the Committee that BCO 31-2 permits the Presbytery, through an
investigation, to determine before adjudication that there is a "strong presumption of guih" with
respect to reports or charges against an accused. The Presbytery having received reports or
charges against one of its members should investigate to determine whether the evidence·warrants
proceeding with a trial (34-2). Because of differences of opinion within the Presbytery and
among the CCB, we recommend that the Presbytery propose amendments to BCO 31, 32, and 34
to clarify this issue.




        1994 (See PART III, JUDICIAL CASE #108)                                         III, p. 138


        1994 (See PART III, JUDICIAL CASE #106)                                         III, p. 132



                                                  78
                     INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION



 38-3 - (See also under 45-6)
           1997, p. 129,25-22, IV, 1:
 Assignment No.1 - Removing Members from the Roll
           The 24th General Assembly referred Overture 26 from Potomac Presbytery and
 Overture 6 from Northeast Presbytery to the CCB to perfect the language of the proposed
 amendments to BCO 38-3 and report back to the 25th General Assembly.
          The CCB will forward its work to Potomac Presbytery for consultation and recommends
the following language: [NOTE: See First Supplemental Report, II, pp 132 for amended
proposal.)
           "a)     When a member or officer of a particular church or presbytery renounces
                   communion with this branch of the visible church by joining some other branch
                   of the Church of Jesus Christ and is in good standing therewith, the irregularity
                   shall be recorded and his name removed from the roll. In the event formal,
                   written charges are pending against that person at that time, then the court of
                   jurisdiction shall, at its discretion:
                    1)      retain that person's name on the roll, conclude the process in accord with
                            BCO 31-2, and conduct the case; or
                   2)       remove that person's name from the roll, without further process, which
                            removal may, at the court's discretion, be excommunication; or
                   3)       remove that person's name from the roll and communicate the pending
                            charges to that branch of the church which the person has joined.
          b)       When a member or officer of a particular church or presbytery renounces
                   communion with that branch of the visible church by joining a group judged by
                   the court with jurisdiction as failing to maintain the Word and Sacraments in
                   their fundamental integrity (BCO 2-2), said court shall warn the person of his
                   danger and remove his name from the roll. In the event formal, written charges
                   are pending against that person at that time, then the court shall follow the
                   procedures set forth in paragraph (a).
          c)       When an officer so renounces communion, he shall be deemed to have resigned
                   from active service in his office."
          The CCB notes that as Protestants, we should distinguish our view of the church from
the historic Roman Catholic definition of the church. Protestants begin with the basic definition
that the church is invisible in essence, while the historic Roman Catholic view starts with the
essence of the church vested in its visibility. Thus the historic Roman Catholic view confuses the
particular church with the universal visible church, hence, no one outside the Roman Catholic
church (or any of its congregations) can be saved.
          The WCF clearly begins with the definition of membership of the invisible church:
          "[t]he catholic or universal Church, which is invisible, consists of the whole
          number of the elect, that have been, are, or shall be gathered into one, under
          Christ the Head thereof .... " (WCF 25-1)
then the universal visible church:
          "[t]he visible Church, which is also catholic or universal under the Gospel (not
          confined to one nation, as before under the law), consists of all those
          throughout the world that profess the true religion; and their children . . . ."
          (WCF 25-2)




                                                 79
                                          PCADIGEST



and finally a particular visible church:
         "[t]his catholic Church hath been sometimes more, sometimes less visible. And
         particular Churches, which are members thereof, are more or less pure,
         according as the doctrine of the Gospel is taught and embraced, . . ." (WCF 25-
         4)
and BCG 6-2 further defines the communing members of a particular church:
         "[c)ommuning members are those who have made a profession of faith in
         Christ, have been baptized, and have been admitted by the Session to the
         Lord's Table."
         It is clear that there have been members of the invisible church and the universal visible
church who were not received into a particular church, e.g. the thief on the cross, men on the
battlefield led to faith in Christ without benefit of baptism, reception into a particular church, and
those attending Christian churches without traditional rolls.
         Therefore, caution needs to be exercised to not define removal from the roll of a
particular church as equivalent to excommunication from the universal visible church. Let it be
recognized that there are irregularities.


         1990, p. 79, Definition of Memorial
I.       MEMORIAL DEFINED
         To my knowledge, the only place where "memorial" as a special communication is used
in the Book of Church Order is in BCG 40-5: "When any court having appellate jurisdiction
shall be advised, either by the records of the court next below or by memorial, either with or
without protest .... "
         In Digest of Acts and Proceedings of the PCUS, 1861-1965, on page 230, it refers to a
 1913 decision to the effect that the rights of appeal, complaint and memorial estopped by
approval of minutes of a lower court by the higher court.
         In Constitution ofPC USA, 1930, p. 414, gives a definition as follows:
         "139. Any judicatory deeming itself aggrieved by the action of any other judicatory of
the same rank, may present a memorial to the judicatory immediately superior to the judicatory
charged with the greivance and to which the latter judicatory is subject, after the manner
prescribed in the sub-chapter on complaints, save only that with regard to the limitation of time,
notice of said memorial shall be lodged with the stated clerks, both of the judicatory charged with
the grievance and of its next superior judicatory, within one year from the commission of the said
alleged grievance.
         "140. When any judicatory deems itself aggrieved by another judicatory and
determines to present a memorial as provided for in the preceeding section, it shall appoint a
committee to conduct the case in all its stages, in whatever judicatory, until the final issue be
reached.
         "141. The judicatory with which the memorial is lodged, if it sustain the same, may
reverse in whole or in part the matter of grievance, and shall direct the lower judicatory how to
dispose of the case, and may enforce its orders. Either party may appeal to the next higher
judicatory, except as limited by Chapter XI ... ofthe Form ofGovemment."
         The Book of Discipline of the Reformed Presbyterian Church, Evangelical Synod had the
following two sections in Chapter XII:
         "3.      Every member of the church has the right of access to any church court by
petition or memorial. He has direct access to the session of the congregation to which he belongs,


                                                 80
                     INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION



but a petition or memorial to a higher court must, in the first place, be presented to the session,
with a request for its transmission.
         "4.       A lower court shall transmit a petition or memorial with or without approval or
concurrence, as it see fit. Before transmitting, the court shall see that the petition or memorial is
in proper form and expressed in respectful language. If transmission is refused, the petitioner or
memorialist shall have the right of appeal. These provisions shall apply alike to a petition or
memorial from an individual, from any number of persons, from a congregation, or from a lower
court."
          In 1994, the 12th General Assembly of the PCA (12-53, II, 58, p. 139) answered a
constitutional inquiry regarding the "proper recourse of a presbytery when in its perception the
General Assembly may have erred in a matter" as follows:
          "1.      In the course of the meeting of the General Assembly (or any court), when an
error is alleged to have been committed, the parties convinced that an error has been made could
have recourse through the provisions of BCD 45.
          "2.      Subsequent to the meeting of the court at which an error has been alleged to have
been committed, a lower court by memorial, or overture, may seek a correction of the alleged
error, if reversible.
          "a.      Properly speaking, no action of previous General Assembly may be amended,
                   rescinded, or annulled. A subsequent General Assembly may take a contrary
                   position and condemn the action of a previous Assembly but the action of the
                   previous Assembly remains its own.
          "b.      If the alleged error is in reference to a judicial decision the decision cannot be
                   reversed, but a judgment can be set aside and a new trial ordered if there is
                   'highly important new evidence' or 'such palpable error as would manifestly
                   tend to interfere with the substantial administration of justice' (Baird's Digest
                   of the Assembly Actions, p. Ill).
          "c.      If the alleged error is related to a part of the constitutional documents which may
                   also be alleged to be in error, a memorial should seek to amend the constitutional
                   documents.
          "d.      In the meanwhile, the lower courts of the church should submit to the decision of
                   the higher court even if it is alleged to have been in error, unless for sake of
                   conscience the lower court should believe itself duty bound to renounce the
                   jurisdiction of the higher court."
II.       ON RE-OPENING A CASE ALREADY ADJUDICATED
          The Digest of the Acts and Proceedings of PCUS, 1861-1965, p. 113, addresses the
matter that the "Assembly will not re-open a case already adjudicated by it, except to correct a
manifest error in its own proceedings."
          With reference to a case in 1891 it says: " .. , where a concrete case is brought judically
before a higher court ... is disposed of by final judgment entered therein and sent down, that is an
end of the constitutional authority of the higher court to deal with that particular case, unless it
again regularly brought before the higher court for adjudication in one of the recognized modes
provided for by our Book ofChurch Order."
          It further adds regarding a case in 1920, "It is a principle of law, held in the highest
courts of the States, and by the Supreme Court of the United States, that public policy requires
that there shall be an end of litigation, and this is as true in the government of the Church as in
the government of the Sate and Nation."
          In Hodge's What is Presbyterian Law, p. 271, the authority of Assembly decisions with
reference to judical decisions is defined:

                                                 81
                                          peA DIGEST



          "And its judicial decisions are final and obligatory in all similar cases. No later
 Assembly can reverse its judicial acts or revise its proceedings. A manifest error may be
corrected. "
          The Digest a/the Acts and Proccedings a/the PC US, 1861-1965, p. 71, reports on an
 1880 case whereby a Synod overtured the Assembly "respectfully praying that it will consider
 and repeal, or at least seriously modify, so much of the deliverance of the last Assembly, in
 relation to worldly amusements ... which are not made by them in a strictly judicial capacity, but
 are deliverances in thesi, can by considered as only didactic, advisory and monitory."
          "The Assembly, in virtue of its powers to give authoritative interpretations of the Word,
 declares:
          l.      Nothing is law, to be enforced by judicial prosecution, but that which is
 contained in the Word as interpreted in our Standards.
          2.      The judicial decisions of our courts differ fun in thesi deliverances, in that the
former determine, and when proceeding from our highest courts, conclude a particular case; but
both these kinds of decisions are alike interpretations of trhe Word by a church court, and both
not only deserve high consideration, but both must be submitted to, unless contrary to the
 Constitution and the Word, as to which there is a right of private judgment belonging to every
church court, and also to every individual church member."
          In connection with the above statement regarding the right of private pudgment, in 1881
the General Assembly stated:
          "The Form of Government ... declares that 'church courts can make no laws binding the
conscience, but may frame symbols of faith,' etc. It follows that church courts are not infallible,
but on the contraty, 'all may err, and many have erred; therefore they are not to be made the rule
of faith or practice, but to be used as help in both.' (WCF, XXllI-3). Thus the right of private
judgment is asserted; this right, however, is not opposed to lawful authority, but to the
assumption of power to bind the conscience."
III.      RECOMMENDAnON
          That Communication 2, "A Memorial from John M. Warren, Jr." asking for clarification
of the 17th General Assembly decision reo Mississippi Valley Presbytery relative to the Carl Fox
case of the 16th General Assembly be referred to the Standing Judicial Commission together with
all other matters relating to the issue.                                                    Adopted



        1994 (See PART III, JUDICIAL CASE #108)                                          III, p. 138


        1994 (See PART III, JUDICIAL CASE #101)                                          III, p. 104


        1991, p. 233,4 E. From North Texas - The Proper Interpretation of BCO 46-5.
It was MlS/P that in the opinion of the Committee the answer to the question, "Does 46-5 allow
sessions the option of removing members' names from the roll without formal process leading to
excommunication?" is that the intention of the 16th General Assembly in amending 46-5 was to
allow for the non-judicial removal of members and the language adopted by the IS* General
Assembly might be so interpreted. (M16GA, 16-77, ill, 13.)
        The following minority report was submitted:


                                                82
                     INTERPRET ATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION



                       Minority Report for Item E - North Texas Presbytery
         This minority report to the advice given by the majority is respectfully submitted. The
grounds for this report are as follows:
1.       The answer avoids a definitive answer to the question posed.
2.       Clearly, BCD 46-5 does allow Sessions the option to remove members from the local
         church roll without formal process leading to excommunication. This clarity is based on:
         a.        Excommunication is a censure '1:0 be inflicted only on account of gross crime or
                   heresy and when the offender shows himself incorrigible and contumacious."
                   (BCD 30-4)
         b.        As a censure, excommunication can be imposed only by judicial process, which
                   requires a charge, an indictment, citation, trial, witnesses, a roll call vote, a
                   verdict and judgment. (BCD 31 and 32)
         c.        Such process is NOT contemplated by 46-5 language authorizing "deleting such
                   name from the church roll."
                   The current 46-5 language is a result of a directive by the 16 General ~ssembly
                                                                                 th
         d.
                   to the CJB '1:0 consider amendments to the BCO to provide for non-judicial
                   removal from membership" (M16GA, 16-77, III, 13, p. 173), the CJB
                   recommendation of the current language, its adoption by the 17th GA and, after
                   approval by 35 of 43 Presbyteries, the 18th GA.
         e.        The principal change in 46-5 so adopted was to eliminate the necessity of
                   complying with 27-5 in favor of following "scriptural procedures (Matthew
                    IS)."
         f.        27-5 requires that 'lhe Church must act through her court unto admonition,
                   suspension, excommunication and deposition." Matthew 18 makes no such
                   requirement.
         g.        To carry out the 16th GA's direction to provide for non-judicial removal, it was
                   necessary to eliminate the 27-5 requirement that 'lhe Church must" take one of
                   the judicial actions of admonition, suspension, excommunication or deposition.
         h.        The new 46-5 language included the addition "The Session shall always notify
                   the person whose name has been deleted." Such notice after the fact of deletion
                   would not comply with the requirements of the judicial process of
                   excommunication.
3.       To equate a deletion from the church rolls because a member has "willfully neglected the
         church for a period of one year or has made it know that he or she has no intention of
         fulfilling the church vow" with the "gross crime or heresy" and incorrigible and
         contumacious conduct essential for excommunication would necessitate an unreasonable
         interpretation of the words used.
         The answer to the question should be clearly stated as: "Yes. The word "delete" as used
in BCD 46-5 does not mean "excommunication" as used in the BCD.
         To accept another interpretation would do violence to the entire Presbyterian system of
Due Process. (Incidentally, it would also result in the possibility' of excommunicating a member
"wh"se residence has been unknown for one year" (paragraph 4 of 46-2).
         Although the majority's deliberately ambiguous answer does allow Sessions the option to
come to the same conclusions as the minority answer, the majority's inability to state a clear
"yes" appears to be based on a sincere question as to the validity of a nonjudicial removal from
the roll. The minority view is that non-judicial removal was clearly endorsed by the actions of
the 16th, 17dt and ISth General Assembly's and 35 of the 43 Presbyteries, and to condemn non-


                                                83
                                          peA DIGEST



judicial removal, such as by restoring the prior 46-5 language, would require a similar change of
the Bro.
                                                         Respectfully submitted in Christ's Service,
                                                             /s/ TE Granville Dutton
         1994 (See PART III, JUDICIAL CASE #103)                                         III, p. 114
         1995, p. 56, 23-15, II, Reference No.2.
         Whether, on what grounds, and under what circumstances BCO 46-5 allows a session to
pursue judicial process against a member once that member has "willfully neglected the church
vows for a period of one year, or has made it known that he or she has no intention of fulfilling
the church vows, or has requested that his or her name be dropped from the church roll," and
further, how Judicial Case 93-3 fits into this interpretation')
Response:
             It is the advice of the CCB that this request for clarification of BCO 46-5 is not a
proper reference to the GA. There is no evidence that Ascension Presbytery is seeking advice on
a matter pending before that body. Certainly, GA Judicial Case 93-3 (Chen v. Ascension
Presbytery) is not properly before the presbytery.
         However, the CCB points out that GA Judicial Case 93-3 does not preclude the full and
formal discipline of ~ member who tenders a "letter of resignation" from his church. The SJC
merely concluded, and the GA approved, that such process was not warranted in this case. BCO
14-7 states that "Uludicial decisions shall be binding and conclusive on the parties who are
directly involved in the matter being adjudicated and may be appealed to in subsequent similar
cases as to any principle which may have been decided." This is further substantiated by PCA
Digest (1973-1993), page 79 concerning the binding character of various interpretations of the
Constitution, which states "judicial cases, when adjudicated by the Assembly, are binding [on the
parties] regarding the matters thus settled."
         It is not within the purview of the CCB's responsibilities to "develop constitutional law"
via hypothetical interpretations of the BCO. This could only be done, constitutionally, through
the BCO's amendment or judicial processes.
         The CCB advises the Bills and Overtures Committee to return this Reference to
Ascension Presbytery with a suggestion that the presbytery seek clarification by drafting precise
language for a proposed amendment to the BCO 46-5. Additionally, it may be helpful to refer to
the business of Overtures 7 and 8.
         1997, p. 131, 25-22, V: When a person "resigns" from membership in a church or
presbytery, is this not tantamount to renouncing the jurisdiction of the body and is there a
constitutional bar to a court accepting this "resignation?"
Response:
         It is the advice of the CCB that there is no constitutional bar that would prevent a court
from accepting the "resignation" and removing the person's name from the roll.
[NOTE: In 1998, the General Assembly vacated 46-5 and substituted a new 38-4 - see also
under 38-3]




                                                84
,
I
                         INTERPRETATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION
I
II                              RULES OF ASSEMBLY OPERATIONS



              1994, p. 72,22-13,5. "Clarification of the procedure for adopting and/or amending the
     report as a whole."                                                                       Adopted
     Answer:
              It is the opinion of the CCB that this Constitutional Inquiry is actually a question
     concerning parliamentary procedure. Our response to the Inquiry is as follows:
     I.       The WCF and the BCO do not touch on this area of "adopting a committee's report as a
             whole."
     2.       RAO 17-3 requires that our committees submit each resolution of its report for separate
              adoption. This requirement supersedes the standard procedures of Robert's Rules of
              Order for committee report.
     3.       The effect of this RAO 17-3 stipulation is to create a confusion surrounding. how to
              complete a committee report. The normal thrust of Robert's Rules (see Section 28
              "Consideration by Paragraph or Seriatim pp. 272-276) is to suggest that recommendation
              in a report be amended separately but not adopted separately. It further suggests that
             there be one and only one motion at the end to adopt the whole report. With this motion,
              further amendment of the separate recommendations would still be possible. However,
             this normal procedure of Robert's Rules is not permissible for one General Assembly to
              use because RAO 17-3 requires a separate motion to adopt each separate
              recommendation. "
     4.      In the discussion of a "Series of Resolutions Offered by a Single Motion", (page 107-
              108) there is provision for the resolutions to be separated by the motion for "Division of
             the Question." It is the opinion of the CCB that the effect of the stipulation ofRAO 17-3
              is to effectively "Divide the Question" of the committee's report. Consequently, each
              recommendation stands on its own and is to be treated as such.
     5.       The effect of the RAO 17-3 stipulation is that it is not appropriate to entertain a motion
             to adopt the report as a whole. The whole has been divided. When all the
              recommendations are adopted, the matter is finished. Consequently, the current practice
              of the General Assembly in entertaining a motion to adopt the "report as a whole",
              allowing for further debate and amendment to the separate recommendations, is
              erroneous, confusing, misleading, and should be discontinued.
     6.       RAO 17-3-d does refer to a parliamentary exception whereby the General Assembly may
              choose to adopt the report as a whole pending the completion of certain items, e.g. the
              budget approval of a committee.
              It is certain, however, that this exception provision may not be used as a forum for
     amending or continuing the debate on any paragraph, section, or resolution which has already
     been adopted. These motions are adopted and may not be debated or amended further unless the
     Assembly votes to reconsider the previously adopted motions. The motion to reconsider normally
     requi;es only a majority vote, although there are some unique characteristics which could require
     a higher vote approval. (See Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, 1990 Edition, Edited by
     Henry M. Robert, III and William J. Evans, Scott Foresmann and Company)
              Also, it is certain that this exception clause may not be used as a forum for introducing
     new motions to be included in the "report as a whole". Such motions from the floor are
     inappropriate in that they introduce new business that has not been considered and brought to the


                                                     85
                                        peA DIGEST



floor of the General Assembly by the committee. The proper forum for these types of motions
are in "Personal Resolutions" which may be referred to the committee for consideration. RAO
12-2 stipulates that all "Personal Resolutions" introducing new business must be presented to the
General Assembly before the close of the second day of business.




                                               86
